Then he rapped on the door with a bit of stick like a handspike that he carried, and when my father appeared, called roughly for a glass of rum.
This, when it was brought to him, he drank slowly, like a connoisseur, lingering on the taste and still looking about him at the cliffs and up at our signboard.
This is a handy cove, says he at length.
Much company, mate my father told him no, very little company, the more was the pity.
Well, then, said he, this is the berth for me.
Here you, matey, he cried to the man who trundled the barrow.
Bring up alongside and help up my chest.
Rum and bacon and eggs is what i want, and that head up there for to watch ships off.
What you mought call me you mought call me captain.
And he threw down three or four gold pieces on the threshold.
And indeed bad as his clothes were and coarsely as he spoke, he had none of the appearance of a man who sailed before the mast, but seemed like a mate or skipper accustomed to be obeyed or to strike.
The man who came with the barrow told us the mail had set him down the morning before at the royal george, that he had inquired what inns there were along the coast, and hearing ours well spoken of, i suppose, and described as lonely, had chosen it from the others for his place of residence.
And that was all we could learn of our guest.
He was a very silent man by custom.
All day he hung round the cove or upon the cliffs with a brass telescope.
All evening he sat in a corner of the parlour next the fire and drank rum and water very strong.
And we and the people who came about our house soon learned to let him be.
Every day when he came back from his stroll he would ask if any seafaring men had gone by along the road.
At first we thought it was the want of company of his own kind that made him ask this question, but at last we began to see he was desirous to avoid them.
When a seaman did put up at the admiral benbow as now and then some did, making by the coast road for bristol he would look in at him through the curtained door before he entered the parlour.
And he was always sure to be as silent as a mouse when any such was present.
For me, at least, there was no secret about the matter, for i was, in a way, a sharer in his alarms.
How that personage haunted my dreams, i need scarcely tell you.
On stormy nights, when the wind shook the four corners of the house and the surf roared along the cove and up the cliffs, i would see him in a thousand forms, and with a thousand diabolical expressions.
Now the leg would be cut off at the knee, now at the hip.
Now he was a monstrous kind of a creature who had never had but the one leg, and that in the middle of his body.
To see him leap and run and pursue me over hedge and ditch was the worst of nightmares.
And altogether i paid pretty dear for my monthly fourpenny piece, in the shape of these abominable fancies.
But though i was so terrified by the idea of the seafaring man with one leg, i was far less afraid of the captain himself than anybody else who knew him.
There were nights when he took a deal more rum and water than his head would carry.
But sometimes he would call for glasses round and force all the trembling company to listen to his stories or bear a chorus to his singing.
For in these fits he was the most overriding companion ever known.
He would slap his hand on the table for silence all round.
He would fly up in a passion of anger at a question, or sometimes because none was put, and so he judged the company was not following his story.
Nor would he allow anyone to leave the inn till he had drunk himself sleepy and reeled off to bed.
His stories were what frightened people worst of all.
By his own account he must have lived his life among some of the wickedest men that god ever allowed upon the sea, and the language in which he told these stories shocked our plain country people almost as much as the crimes that he described.
My father was always saying the inn would be ruined, for people would soon cease coming there to be tyrannized over and put down, and sent shivering to their beds.
But i really believe his presence did us good.
People were frightened at the time, but on looking back they rather liked it.
In one way, indeed, he bade fair to ruin us, for he kept on staying week after week, and at last month after month, so that all the money had been long exhausted, and still my father never plucked up the heart to insist on having more.
If ever he mentioned it, the captain blew through his nose so loudly that you might say he roared, and stared my poor father out of the room.
I have seen him wringing his hands after such a rebuff, and i am sure the annoyance and the terror he lived in must have greatly hastened his early and unhappy death.
All the time he lived with us the captain made no change whatever in his dress but to buy some stockings from a hawker.
One of the cocks of his hat having fallen down, he let it hang from that day forth, though it was a great annoyance when it blew.
I remember the appearance of his coat, which he patched himself upstairs in his room, and which, before the end, was nothing but patches.
He never wrote or received a letter, and he never spoke with any but the neighbours, and with these, for the most part, only when drunk on rum.
He was only once crossed, and that was towards the end, when my poor father was far gone in a decline that took him off.
Livesey came late one afternoon to see the patient, took a bit of dinner from my mother, and went into the parlour to smoke a pipe until his horse should come down from the hamlet, for we had no stabling at the old benbow.
I followed him in, and i remember observing the contrast the neat, bright doctor, with his powder as white as snow and his bright, black eyes and pleasant manners, made with the coltish country folk, and above all, with that filthy, heavy, bleared scarecrow of a pirate of ours, sitting, far gone in rum, with his arms on the table.
But by this time we had all long ceased to pay any particular notice to the song.
It was new, that night, to nobody but dr.
Livesey, and on him i observed it did not produce an agreeable effect, for he looked up for a moment quite angrily before he went on with his talk to old taylor, the gardener, on a new cure for the rheumatics.
In the meantime, the captain gradually brightened up at his own music, and at last flapped his hand upon the table before him in a way we all knew to mean silence.
The voices stopped at once, all but dr.
He went on as before speaking clear and kind and drawing briskly at his pipe between every word or two.
The captain glared at him for a while, flapped his hand again, glared still harder, and at last broke out with a villainous, low oath, silence, there, between decks were you addressing me, sir says the doctor.
The doctor never so much as moved.
He spoke to him as before, over his shoulder and in the same tone of voice, rather high, so that all the room might hear, but perfectly calm and steady if you do not put that knife this instant in your pocket, i promise, upon my honour, you shall hang at the next assizes.
Then followed a battle of looks between them, but the captain soon knuckled under, put up his weapon, and resumed his seat, grumbling like a beaten dog.
Black dog appears and disappears it was not very long after this that there occurred the first of the mysterious events that rid us at last of the captain, though not, as you will see, of his affairs.
It was a bitter cold winter, with long, hard frosts and heavy gales.
And it was plain from the first that my poor father was little likely to see the spring.
He sank daily, and my mother and i had all the inn upon our hands, and were kept busy enough without paying much regard to our unpleasant guest.
The captain had risen earlier than usual and set out down the beach, his cutlass swinging under the broad skirts of the old blue coat, his brass telescope under his arm, his hat tilted back upon his head.
I remember his breath hanging like smoke in his wake as he strode off, and the last sound i heard of him as he turned the big rock was a loud snort of indignation, as though his mind was still running upon dr.
He was a pale, tallowy creature, wanting two fingers of the left hand, and though he wore a cutlass, he did not look much like a fighter.
I had always my eye open for seafaring men, with one leg or two, and i remember this one puzzled me.
He was not sailorly, and yet he had a smack of the sea about him too.
I asked him what was for his service, and he said he would take rum.
But as i was going out of the room to fetch it, he sat down upon a table and motioned me to draw near.
I paused where i was, with my napkin in my hand.
Come here, sonny, says he.
Is this here table for my mate bill he asked with a kind of leer.
I told him i did not know his mate bill, and this was for a person who stayed in our house whom we called the captain.
Well, said he, my mate bill would be called the captain, as like as not.
He has a cut on one cheek and a mighty pleasant way with him, particularly in drink, has my mate bill.
Now, is my mate bill in this here house i told him he was out walking.
The expression of his face as he said these words was not at all pleasant, and i had my own reasons for thinking that the stranger was mistaken, even supposing he meant what he said.
But it was no affair of mine, i thought.
And besides, it was difficult to know what to do.
The stranger kept hanging about just inside the inn door, peering round the corner like a cat waiting for a mouse.
Once i stepped out myself into the road, but he immediately called me back, and as i did not obey quick enough for his fancy, a most horrible change came over his tallowy face, and he ordered me in with an oath that made me jump.
As soon as i was back again he returned to his former manner, half fawning, half sneering, patted me on the shoulder, told me i was a good boy and he had taken quite a fancy to me.
So saying, the stranger backed along with me into the parlour and put me behind him in the corner so that we were both hidden by the open door.
I was very uneasy and alarmed, as you may fancy, and it rather added to my fears to observe that the stranger was certainly frightened himself.
He cleared the hilt of his cutlass and loosened the blade in the sheath.
And all the time we were waiting there he kept swallowing as if he felt what we used to call a lump in the throat.
At last in strode the captain, slammed the door behind him, without looking to the right or left, and marched straight across the room to where his breakfast awaited him.
Bill, said the stranger in a voice that i thought he had tried to make bold and big.
The captain spun round on his heel and fronted us.
All the brown had gone out of his face, and even his nose was blue.
He had the look of a man who sees a ghost, or the evil one, or something worse, if anything can be.
And upon my word, i felt sorry to see him all in a moment turn so old and sick.
Come, bill, you know me.
You know an old shipmate, bill, surely, said the stranger.
The captain made a sort of gasp.
And who else returned the other, getting more at his ease.
Black dog as ever was, come for to see his old shipmate billy, at the admiral benbow inn.
Ah, bill, bill, we have seen a sight of times, us two, since i lost them two talons, holding up his mutilated hand.
Now, look here, said the captain.
He bade me go and leave the door wide open.
None of your keyholes for me, sonny, he said.
And i left them together and retired into the bar.
For a long time, though i certainly did my best to listen, i could hear nothing but a low gattling.
But at last the voices began to grow higher, and i could pick up a word or two, mostly oaths, from the captain.
And an end of it he cried once.
And again, if it comes to swinging, swing all, say i.
Just at the door the captain aimed at the fugitive one last tremendous cut, which would certainly have split him to the chine had it not been intercepted by our big signboard of admiral benbow.
You may see the notch on the lower side of the frame to this day.
That blow was the last of the battle.
Once out upon the road, black dog, in spite of his wound, showed a wonderful clean pair of heels and disappeared over the edge of the hill in half a minute.
The captain, for his part, stood staring at the signboard like a bewildered man.
Then he passed his hand over his eyes several times and at last turned back into the house.
And as he spoke, he reeled a little, and caught himself with one hand against the wall.
I must get away from here.
Rum rum i ran to fetch it, but i was quite unsteadied by all that had fallen out, and i broke one glass and fouled the tap, and while i was still getting in my own way, i heard a loud fall in the parlour, and running in, beheld the captain lying full length upon the floor.
At the same instant my mother, alarmed by the cries and fighting, came running downstairs to help me.
Between us we raised his head.
He was breathing very loud and hard, but his eyes were closed and his face a horrible colour.
I got the rum, to be sure, and tried to put it down his throat, but his teeth were tightly shut and his jaws as strong as iron.
It was a happy relief for us when the door opened and doctor livesey came in, on his visit to my father.
No more wounded than you or i.
The man has had a stroke, as i warned him.
Hawkins, just you run upstairs to your husband and tell him, if possible, nothing about it.
Jim, you get me a basin.
It was tattooed in several places.
Prophetic, said the doctor, touching this picture with his finger.
Jim, he said, are you afraid of blood no, sir, said i.
Well, then, said he, you hold the basin .
And with that he took his lancet and opened a vein.
A great deal of blood was taken before the captain opened his eyes and looked mistily about him.
First he recognized the doctor with an unmistakable frown.
Then his glance fell upon me, and he looked relieved.
You have been drinking rum.
You have had a stroke, precisely as i told you.
And i have just, very much against my own will, dragged you headforemost out of the grave.
Much i care, returned the doctor.
And i call you by it for the sake of shortness, and what i have to say to you is this.
Come, now, make an effort.
Between us, with much trouble, we managed to hoist him upstairs, and laid him on his bed, where his head fell back on the pillow as if he were almost fainting.
And with that he went off to see my father, taking me with him by the arm.
This is nothing, he said as soon as he had closed the door.
I have drawn blood enough to keep him quiet awhile.
But another stroke would settle him.
He was lying very much as we had left him, only a little higher, and he seemed both weak and excited.
But he broke in cursing the doctor, in a feeble voice but heartily.
Doctors is all swabs, he said.
And he ran on again for a while with curses.
Look, jim, how my fingers fidges, he continued in the pleading tone.
I seen old flint in the corner there, behind you.
As plain as print, i seen him.
He was growing more and more excited, and this alarmed me for my father, who was very low that day and needed quiet.
I want none of your money, said i, but what you owe my father.
When i brought it to him, he seized it greedily and drank it out.
And now, matey, did that doctor say how long i was to lie here in this old berth a week at least, said i.
The lubbers is going about to get the wind of me this blessed moment.
I never wasted good money of mine, nor lost it neither.
As he was thus speaking, he had risen from bed with great difficulty, holding to my shoulder with a grip that almost made me cry out, and moving his legs like so much dead weight.
His words, spirited as they were in meaning, contrasted sadly with the weakness of the voice in which they were uttered.
He paused when he had got into a sitting position on the edge.
Before i could do much to help him he had fallen back again to his former place, where he lay for a while silent.
Jim, he said at length, you saw that seafaring man today black dog i asked.
Ah black dog, says he.
But what is the black spot, captain i asked.
He wandered a little longer, his voice growing weaker.
What i should have done had all gone well i do not know.
Probably i should have told the whole story to the doctor, for i was in mortal fear lest the captain should repent of his confessions and make an end of me.
But as things fell out, my poor father died quite suddenly that evening, which put all other matters on one side.
Our natural distress, the visits of the neighbours, the arranging of the funeral, and all the work of the inn to be carried on in the meanwhile kept me so busy that i had scarcely time to think of the captain, far less to be afraid of him.
He got downstairs next morning, to be sure, and had his meals as usual, though he ate little and had more, i am afraid, than his usual supply of rum, for he helped himself out of the bar, scowling and blowing through his nose, and no one dared to cross him.
On the night before the funeral he was as drunk as ever.
I have said the captain was weak, and indeed he seemed rather to grow weaker than regain his strength.
He clambered up and down stairs, and went from the parlour to the bar and back again, and sometimes put his nose out of doors to smell the sea, holding on to the walls as he went for support and breathing hard and fast like a man on a steep mountain.
He never particularly addressed me, and it is my belief he had as good as forgotten his confidences.
But his temper was more flighty, and allowing for his bodily weakness, more violent than ever.
He had an alarming way now when he was drunk of drawing his cutlass and laying it bare before him on the table.
But with all that, he minded people less and seemed shut up in his own thoughts and rather wandering.
He was plainly blind, for he tapped before him with a stick and wore a great green shade over his eyes and nose.
I hear a voice, said he, a young voice.
I was so much startled that i struggled to withdraw, but the blind man pulled me close up to him with a single action of his arm.
Now, boy, he said, take me in to the captain.
Sir, said i, upon my word i dare not.
And he gave it, as he spoke, a wrench that made me cry out.
Sir, said i, it is for yourself i mean.
The captain is not what he used to be.
He sits with a drawn cutlass.
It cowed me more than the pain, and i began to obey him at once, walking straight in at the door and towards the parlour, where our sick old buccaneer was sitting, dazed with rum.
The blind man clung close to me, holding me in one iron fist and leaning almost more of his weight on me than i could carry.
Between this and that, i was so utterly terrified of the blind beggar that i forgot my terror of the captain, and as i opened the parlour door, cried out the words he had ordered in a trembling voice.
The poor captain raised his eyes, and at one look the rum went out of him and left him staring sober.
The expression of his face was not so much of terror as of mortal sickness.
He made a movement to rise, but i do not believe he had enough force left in his body.
Now, bill, sit where you are, said the beggar.
Hold out your left hand.
Boy, take his left hand by the wrist and bring it near to my right.
It was some time before either i or the captain seemed to gather our senses, but at length, and about at the same moment, i released his wrist, which i was still holding, and he drew in his hand and looked sharply into the palm.
Even as he did so, he reeled, put his hand to his throat, stood swaying for a moment, and then, with a peculiar sound, fell from his whole height face foremost to the floor.
I ran to him at once, calling to my mother.
But haste was all in vain.
The captain had been struck dead by thundering apoplexy.
It is a curious thing to understand, for i had certainly never liked the man, though of late i had begun to pity him, but as soon as i saw that he was dead, i burst into a flood of tears.
It was the second death i had known, and the sorrow of the first was still fresh in my heart.
Indeed, it seemed impossible for either of us to remain much longer in the house.
The fall of coals in the kitchen grate, the very ticking of the clock, filled us with alarms.
The neighbourhood, to our ears, seemed haunted by approaching footsteps.
And what between the dead body of the captain on the parlour floor and the thought of that detestable blind beggar hovering near at hand and ready to return, there were moments when, as the saying goes, i jumped in my skin for terror.
Something must speedily be resolved upon, and it occurred to us at last to go forth together and seek help in the neighbouring hamlet.
No sooner said than done.
The hamlet lay not many hundred yards away, though out of view, on the other side of the next cove.
And what greatly encouraged me, it was in an opposite direction from that whence the blind man had made his appearance and whither he had presumably returned.
We were not many minutes on the road, though we sometimes stopped to lay hold of each other and hearken.
But that, as it proved, was the best of the help we were likely to get in that quarter.
The name of captain flint, though it was strange to me, was well enough known to some there and carried a great weight of terror.
And the short and the long of the matter was, that while we could get several who were willing enough to ride to dr.
They say cowardice is infectious.
But then argument is, on the other hand, a great emboldener.
And so when each had said his say, my mother made them a speech.
She would not, she declared, lose money that belonged to her fatherless boy.
If none of the rest of you dare, she said, jim and i dare.
Crossley, to bring back our lawful money in.
Of course i said i would go with my mother, and of course they all cried out at our foolhardiness, but even then not a man would go along with us.
My heart was beating finely when we two set forth in the cold night upon this dangerous venture.
A full moon was beginning to rise and peered redly through the upper edges of the fog, and this increased our haste, for it was plain, before we came forth again, that all would be as bright as day, and our departure exposed to the eyes of any watchers.
We slipped along the hedges, noiseless and swift, nor did we see or hear anything to increase our terrors, till, to our relief, the door of the admiral benbow had closed behind us.
He lay as we had left him, on his back, with his eyes open and one arm stretched out.
Draw down the blind, jim, whispered my mother.
They might come and watch outside.
And now, said she when i had done so, we have to get the key off that.
I went down on my knees at once.
On the floor close to his hand there was a little round of paper, blackened on the one side.
I could not doubt that this was the black spot.
And taking it up, i found written on the other side, in a very good, clear hand, this short message you have till ten tonight.
He had till ten, mother, said i.
And just as i said it, our old clock began striking.
This sudden noise startled us shockingly.
But the news was good, for it was only six.
Now, jim, she said, that key.
I felt in his pockets, one after another.
A few small coins, a thimble, and some thread and big needles, a piece of pigtail tobacco bitten away at the end, his gully with the crooked handle, a pocket compass, and a tinder box were all that they contained, and i began to despair.
Overcoming a strong repugnance, i tore open his shirt at the neck, and there, sure enough, hanging to a bit of tarry string, which i cut with his own gully, we found the key.
At this triumph we were filled with hope and hurried upstairs without delay to the little room where he had slept so long and where his box had stood since the day of his arrival.
Give me the key, said my mother.
And though the lock was very stiff, she had turned it and thrown back the lid in a twinkling.
A strong smell of tobacco and tar rose from the interior, but nothing was to be seen on the top except a suit of very good clothes, carefully brushed and folded.
They had never been worn, my mother said.
I have often wondered since why he should have carried about these shells with him in his wandering, guilty, and hunted life.
In the meantime, we had found nothing of any value but the silver and the trinkets, and neither of these were in our way.
My mother pulled it up with impatience, and there lay before us, the last things in the chest, a bundle tied up in oilcloth, and looking like papers, and a canvas bag that gave forth, at a touch, the jingle of gold.
The guineas, too, were about the scarcest, and it was with these only that my mother knew how to make her count.
It drew nearer and nearer, while we sat holding our breath.
Then it struck sharp on the inn door, and then we could hear the handle being turned and the bolt rattling as the wretched being tried to enter.
And then there was a long time of silence both within and without.
At last the tapping recommenced, and, to our indescribable joy and gratitude, died slowly away again until it ceased to be heard.
But my mother, frightened as she was, would not consent to take a fraction more than was due to her and was obstinately unwilling to be content with less.
It was not yet seven, she said, by a long way.
She knew her rights and she would have them.
And she was still arguing with me when a little low whistle sounded a good way off upon the hill.
That was enough, and more than enough, for both of us.
Next moment we were both groping downstairs, leaving the candle by the empty chest.
And the next we had opened the door and were in full retreat.
We had not started a moment too soon.
The fog was rapidly dispersing.
Already the moon shone quite clear on the high ground on either side.
And it was only in the exact bottom of the dell and round the tavern door that a thin veil still hung unbroken to conceal the first steps of our escape.
Nor was this all, for the sound of several footsteps running came already to our ears, and as we looked back in their direction, a light tossing to and fro and still rapidly advancing showed that one of the newcomers carried a lantern.
My dear, said my mother suddenly, take the money and run on.
This was certainly the end for both of us, i thought.
How i cursed the cowardice of the neighbours.
How i blamed my poor mother for her honesty and her greed, for her past foolhardiness and present weakness we were just at the little bridge, by good fortune.
And i helped her, tottering as she was, to the edge of the bank, where, sure enough, she gave a sigh and fell on my shoulder.
I do not know how i found the strength to do it at all, and i am afraid it was roughly done, but i managed to drag her down the bank and a little way under the arch.
Farther i could not move her, for the bridge was too low to let me do more than crawl below it.
The last of the blind man my curiosity, in a sense, was stronger than my fear, for i could not remain where i was, but crept back to the bank again, whence, sheltering my head behind a bush of broom, i might command the road before our door.
I was scarcely in position ere my enemies began to arrive, seven or eight of them, running hard, their feet beating out of time along the road and the man with the lantern some paces in front.
Three men ran together, hand in hand.
And i made out, even through the mist, that the middle man of this trio was the blind beggar.
The next moment his voice showed me that i was right.
Down with the door he cried.
Aye, aye, sir answered two or three.
And then i could see them pause, and hear speeches passed in a lower key, as if they were surprised to find the door open.
But the pause was brief, for the blind man again issued his commands.
His voice sounded louder and higher, as if he were afire with eagerness and rage.
In, in, in he shouted, and cursed them for their delay.
Four or five of them obeyed at once, two remaining on the road with the formidable beggar.
But the blind man swore at them again for their delay.
Search him, some of you shirking lubbers, and the rest of you aloft and get the chest, he cried.
I could hear their feet rattling up our old stairs, so that the house must have shook with it.
Promptly afterwards, fresh sounds of astonishment arose.
Is it there roared pew.
The blind man cursed the money.
Here, you below there, is it on bill cried the blind man again.
I wish i had put his eyes out cried the blind man, pew.
Sure enough, they left their glim here, said the fellow from the window.
Budge, you skulk cried pew.
They must be close by.
You have your hands on it.
They might have hid the blessed thing, said another.
Squalling was the word for it.
These, in their turn, cursed back at the blind miscreant, threatened him in horrid terms, and tried in vain to catch the stick and wrest it from his grasp.
And that was plainly the last signal of danger, for the buccaneers turned at once and ran, separating in every direction, one seaward along the cove, one slant across the hill, and so on, so that in half a minute not a sign of them remained but pew.
Him they had deserted, whether in sheer panic or out of revenge for his ill words and blows i know not.
But there he remained behind, tapping up and down the road in a frenzy, and groping and calling for his comrades.
At this pew saw his error, turned with a scream, and ran straight for the ditch, into which he rolled.
But he was on his feet again in a second and made another dash, now utterly bewildered, right under the nearest of the coming horses.
The rider tried to save him, but in vain.
Down went pew with a cry that rang high into the night.
And the four hoofs trampled and spurned him and passed by.
He fell on his side, then gently collapsed upon his face and moved no more.
I leaped to my feet and hailed the riders.
They were pulling up, at any rate, horrified at the accident.
And i soon saw what they were.
One, tailing out behind the rest, was a lad that had gone from the hamlet to dr.
The rest were revenue officers, whom he had met by the way, and with whom he had had the intelligence to return at once.
Pew was dead, stone dead.
As for my mother, when we had carried her up to the hamlet, a little cold water and salts and that soon brought her back again, and she was none the worse for her terror, though she still continued to deplore the balance of the money.
But his men had to dismount and grope down the dingle, leading, and sometimes supporting, their horses, and in continual fear of ambushes.
So it was no great matter for surprise that when they got down to the hole the lugger was already under way, though still close in.
A voice replied, telling him to keep out of the moonlight or he would get some lead in him, and at the same time a bullet whistled close by his arm.
Soon after, the lugger doubled the point and disappeared.
And that, said he, is just about as good as nothing.
I went back with him to the admiral benbow, and you cannot imagine a house in such a state of smash.
The very clock had been thrown down by these fellows in their furious hunt after my mother and myself.
Dance could make nothing of the scene.
They got the money, you say well, then, hawkins, what in fortune were they after more money, i suppose no, sir.
Not money, i think, replied i.
In fact, sir, i believe i have the thing in my breast pocket.
And to tell you the truth, i should like to get it put in safety.
And, now i come to think of it, i might as well ride round there myself and report to him or squire.
I thanked him heartily for the offer, and we walked back to the hamlet where the horses were.
By the time i had told mother of my purpose they were all in the saddle.
Dance, you have a good horse.
Take up this lad behind you.
The house was all dark to the front.
Dance told me to jump down and knock, and dogger gave me a stirrup to descend by.
The door was opened almost at once by the maid.
No, she said, he had come home in the afternoon but had gone up to the hall to dine and pass the evening with the squire.
So there we go, boys, said mr.
Dance dismounted, and taking me along with him, was admitted at a word into the house.
The servant led us down a matted passage and showed us at the end into a great library, all lined with bookcases and busts upon the top of them, where the squire and dr.
Livesey sat, pipe in hand, on either side of a bright fire.
I had never seen the squire so near at hand.
His eyebrows were very black, and moved readily, and this gave him a look of some temper, not bad, you would say, but quick and high.
Dance, says he, very stately and condescending.
Good evening, dance, says the doctor with a nod.
And good evening to you, friend jim.
What good wind brings you here the supervisor stood up straight and stiff and told his story like a lesson.
And you should have seen how the two gentlemen leaned forward and looked at each other, and forgot to smoke in their surprise and interest.
When they heard how my mother went back to the inn, dr.
Livesey fairly slapped his thigh, and the squire cried bravo and broke his long pipe against the grate.
Long before it was done, mr.
Dance finished the story.
Dance, said the squire, you are a very noble fellow.
And as for riding down that black, atrocious miscreant, i regard it as an act of virtue, sir, like stamping on a cockroach.
This lad hawkins is a trump, i perceive.
Hawkins, will you ring that bell mr.
Dance must have some ale.
And so, jim, said the doctor, you have the thing that they were after, have you here it is, sir, said i, and gave him the oilskin packet.
The doctor looked it all over, as if his fingers were itching to open it.
But instead of doing that, he put it quietly in the pocket of his coat.
But i mean to keep jim hawkins here to sleep at my house, and with your permission, i propose we should have up the cold pie and let him sup.
As you will, livesey, said the squire.
Hawkins has earned better than cold pie.
So a big pigeon pie was brought in and put on a sidetable, and i made a hearty supper, for i was as hungry as a hawk, while mr.
Dance was further complimented and at last dismissed.
And now, squire, said the doctor.
And now, livesey, said the squire in the same breath.
One at a time, one at a time, laughed dr.
You have heard of this flint, i suppose heard of him cried the squire.
Heard of him, you say he was the bloodthirstiest buccaneer that sailed.
Blackbeard was a child to flint.
The spaniards were so prodigiously afraid of him that, i tell you, sir, i was sometimes proud he was an englishman.
But the point is, had he money money cried the squire.
Have you heard the story what were these villains after but money what do they care for but money for what would they risk their rascal carcasses but money that we shall soon know, replied the doctor.
What i want to know is this supposing that i have here in my pocket some clue to where flint buried his treasure, will that treasure amount to much amount, sir cried the squire.
Very well, said the doctor.
And he laid it before him on the table.
The bundle was sewn together, and the doctor had to get out his instrument case and cut the stitches with his medical scissors.
The squire and i were both peering over his shoulder as he opened it, for dr.
On the first page there were only some scraps of writing, such as a man with a pen in his hand might make for idleness or practice.
One was the same as the tattoo mark, billy bones his fancy .
Bones, mate, no more rum, off palm key he got itt, and some other snatches, mostly single words and unintelligible.
I could not help wondering who it was that had got itt, and what itt was that he got.
A knife in his back as like as not.
Not much instruction there, said dr.
Livesey as he passed on.
The next ten or twelve pages were filled with a curious series of entries.
The record lasted over nearly twenty years, the amount of the separate entries growing larger as time went on, and at the end a grand total had been made out after five or six wrong additions, and these words appended, bones, his pile.
The thing is as clear as noonday, cried the squire.
These crosses stand for the names of ships or towns that they sank or plundered.
You see, here was some unhappy vessel boarded off that coast.
Right said the doctor.
See what it is to be a traveller.
Right and the amounts increase, you see, as he rose in rank.
There was little else in the volume but a few bearings of places noted in the blank leaves towards the end and a table for reducing french, english, and spanish moneys to a common value.
Thrifty man cried the doctor.
And now, said the squire, for the other.
The paper had been sealed in several places with a thimble by way of seal.
The doctor opened the seals with great care, and there fell out the map of an island, with latitude and longitude, soundings, names of hills and bays and inlets, and every particular that would be needed to bring a ship to a safe anchorage upon its shores.
Skeleton island e.s.e.
The bar silver is in the north cache.
You can find it by the trend of the east hummock, ten fathoms south of the black crag with the face on it.
Point of north inlet cape, bearing e.
But brief as it was, and to me incomprehensible, it filled the squire and dr.
Livesey, said the squire, you will give up this wretched practice at once.
Tomorrow i start for bristol.
Name the dog, sir you, replied the doctor.
For you cannot hold your tongue.
We are not the only men who know of this paper.
We must none of us go alone till we get to sea.
Jim and i shall stick together in the meanwhile.
Livesey, returned the squire, you are always in the right of it.
The doctor had to go to london for a physician to take charge of his practice.
The squire was hard at work at bristol.
I brooded by the hour together over the map, all the details of which i well remembered.
I explored every acre of its surface.
Sometimes the isle was thick with savages, with whom we fought, sometimes full of dangerous animals that hunted us, but in all my fancies nothing occurred to me so strange and tragic as our actual adventures.
So the weeks passed on, till one fine day there came a letter addressed to dr.
Livesey, with this addition, to be opened, in the case of his absence, by tom redruth or young hawkins.
The ship is bought and fitted.
She lies at anchor, ready for sea.
I got her through my old friend, blandly, who has proved himself throughout the most surprising trump.
Redruth, said i, interrupting the letter, dr.
Livesey will not like that.
The squire has been talking, after all.
Livesey, i should think.
At that i gave up all attempts at commentary and read straight on blandly himself found the hispaniola, and by the most admirable management got her for the merest trifle.
There is a class of men in bristol monstrously prejudiced against blandly.
None of them dare, however, to deny the merits of the ship.
So far there was not a hitch.
It was the crew that troubled me.
I was standing on the dock, when, by the merest accident, i fell in talk with him.
He had hobbled down there that morning, he said, to get a smell of the salt.
Long john silver, he is called, and has lost a leg.
He has no pension, livesey.
Imagine the abominable age we live in well, sir, i thought i had only found a cook, but it was a crew i had discovered.
I declare we could fight a frigate.
Long john even got rid of two out of the six or seven i had already engaged.
I am in the most magnificent health and spirits, eating like a bull, sleeping like a tree, yet i shall not enjoy a moment till i hear my old tarpaulins tramping round the capstan.
So now, livesey, come post.
Do not lose an hour, if you respect me.
Let young hawkins go at once to see his mother, with redruth for a guard.
And then both come full speed to bristol.
Long john silver unearthed a very competent man for a mate, a man named arrow.
I have a boatswain who pipes, livesey.
I forgot to tell you that silver is a man of substance.
He leaves his wife to manage the inn.
And as she is a woman of colour, a pair of old bachelors like you and i may be excused for guessing that it is the wife, quite as much as the health, that sends him back to roving.
You can fancy the excitement into which that letter put me.
I was half beside myself with glee.
And if ever i despised a man, it was old tom redruth, who could do nothing but grumble and lament.
Nobody but old redruth would have dared so much as even to grumble.
The next morning he and i set out on foot for the admiral benbow, and there i found my mother in good health and spirits.
The captain, who had so long been a cause of so much discomfort, was gone where the wicked cease from troubling.
He had found her a boy as an apprentice also so that she should not want help while i was gone.
It was on seeing that boy that i understood, for the first time, my situation.
I had thought up to that moment of the adventures before me, not at all of the home that i was leaving.
And now, at sight of this clumsy stranger, who was to stay here in my place beside my mother, i had my first attack of tears.
The night passed, and the next day, after dinner, redruth and i were afoot again and on the road.
Next moment we had turned the corner and my home was out of sight.
The mail picked us up about dusk at the royal george on the heath.
I was wedged in between redruth and a stout old gentleman, and in spite of the swift motion and the cold night air, i must have dozed a great deal from the very first, and then slept like a log up hill and down dale through stage after stage, for when i was awakened at last it was by a punch in the ribs, and i opened my eyes to find that we were standing still before a large building in a city street and that the day had already broken a long time.
Trelawney had taken up his residence at an inn far down the docks to superintend the work upon the schooner.
Thither we had now to walk, and our way, to my great delight, lay along the quays and beside the great multitude of ships of all sizes and rigs and nations.
Though i had lived by the shore all my life, i seemed never to have been near the sea till then.
The smell of tar and salt was something new.
I saw the most wonderful figureheads, that had all been far over the ocean.
And if i had seen as many kings or archbishops i could not have been more delighted.
Here you are, he cried, and the doctor came last night from london.
I set off, overjoyed at this opportunity to see some more of the ships and seamen, and picked my way among a great crowd of people and carts and bales, for the dock was now at its busiest, until i found the tavern in question.
It was a bright enough little place of entertainment.
The sign was newly painted.
The windows had neat red curtains.
The floor was cleanly sanded.
There was a street on each side and an open door on both, which made the large, low room pretty clear to see in, in spite of clouds of tobacco smoke.
The customers were mostly seafaring men, and they talked so loudly that i hung at the door, almost afraid to enter.
As i was waiting, a man came out of a side room, and at a glance i was sure he must be long john.
His left leg was cut off close by the hip, and under the left shoulder he carried a crutch, which he managed with wonderful dexterity, hopping about upon it like a bird.
Indeed, he seemed in the most cheerful spirits, whistling as he moved about among the tables, with a merry word or a slap on the shoulder for the more favoured of his guests.
But one look at the man before me was enough.
I plucked up courage at once, crossed the threshold, and walked right up to the man where he stood, propped on his crutch, talking to a customer.
Silver, sir i asked, holding out the note.
Such is my name, to be sure.
Oh said he, quite loud, and offering his hand.
Pleased i am to see you.
And he took my hand in his large firm grasp.
Just then one of the customers at the far side rose suddenly and made for the door.
It was close by him, and he was out in the street in a moment.
But his hurry had attracted my notice, and i recognized him at glance.
Harry, run and catch him.
One of the others who was nearest the door leaped up and started in pursuit.
If he were admiral hawke he shall pay his score, cried silver.
And then, relinquishing my hand, who did you say he was he asked.
Black what dog, sir, said i.
Trelawney not told you of the buccaneers he was one of them.
In my house ben, run and help harry.
One of those swabs, was he was that you drinking with him, morgan step up here.
If you had been mixed up with the like of that, you would never have put another foot in my house, you may lay to that.
Get back to your place for a lubber, tom.
He used to come here with a blind beggar, he used.
That he did, you may be sure, said i.
I knew that blind man too.
It was cried silver, now quite excited.
Pew that were his name for certain.
Few seamen run better than ben.
But he was too deep, and too ready, and too clever for me, and by the time the two men had come back out of breath and confessed that they had lost the track in a crowd, and been scolded like thieves, i would have gone bail for the innocence of long john silver.
I see that when you first come in.
The score he burst out.
I could not help joining, and we laughed together, peal after peal, until the tavern rang again.
But come now, stand by to go about.
Dooty is dooty, messmates.
Nor you neither, says you.
But dash my buttons that was a good un about my score.
And he began to laugh again, and that so heartily, that though i did not see the joke as he did, i was again obliged to join him in his mirth.
I began to see that here was one of the best of possible shipmates.
When we got to the inn, the squire and dr.
Livesey were seated together, finishing a quart of ale with a toast in it, before they should go aboard the schooner on a visit of inspection.
Long john told the story from first to last, with a great deal of spirit and the most perfect truth.
The two gentlemen regretted that black dog had got away, but we all agreed there was nothing to be done, and after he had been complimented, long john took up his crutch and departed.
All hands aboard by four this afternoon, shouted the squire after him.
Aye, aye, sir, cried the cook, in the passage.
Well, squire, said dr.
But i will say this, john silver suits me.
And now, added the doctor, jim may come on board with us, may he not to be sure he may, says squire.
Powder and arms the hispaniola lay some way out, and we went under the figureheads and round the sterns of many other ships, and their cables sometimes grated underneath our keel, and sometimes swung above us.
At last, however, we got alongside, and were met and saluted as we stepped aboard by the mate, mr.
Arrow, a brown old sailor with earrings in his ears and a squint.
He and the squire were very thick and friendly, but i soon observed that things were not the same between mr.
Trelawney and the captain.
Captain smollett, sir, axing to speak with you, said he.
Show him in, said the squire.
The captain, who was close behind his messenger, entered at once and shut the door behind him.
Well, captain smollett, what have you to say all well, i hope.
All shipshape and seaworthy well, sir, said the captain, better speak plain, i believe, even at the risk of offence.
She seems a clever craft.
Possibly, sir, you may not like your employer, either says the squire.
Stay a bit, said he, stay a bit.
No use of such questions as that but to produce ill feeling.
Now, why i was engaged, sir, on what we call sealed orders, to sail this ship for that gentleman where he should bid me, said the captain.
But now i find that every man before the mast knows more than i do.
Now, treasure is ticklish work.
Trelawney the secret has been told to the parrot.
That is all clear, and, i dare say, true enough, replied dr.
We take the risk, but we are not so ignorant as you believe us.
And i think i should have had the choosing of my own hands, if you go to that.
Perhaps you should, replied the doctor.
My friend should, perhaps, have taken you along with him.
But the slight, if there be one, was unintentional.
Well, now, and the short and long of it, captain asked the doctor.
Tell us what you want.
Well, gentlemen, are you determined to go on this cruise like iron, answered the squire.
Very good, said the captain.
They are putting the powder and the arms in the fore hold.
Now, you have a good place under the cabin.
Then, you are bringing four of your own people with you, and they tell me some of them are to be berthed forward.
One more, said the captain.
Far too much, agreed the doctor.
I never told that, cried the squire, to a soul the hands know it, sir, returned the captain.
Livesey, that must have been you or hawkins, cried the squire.
And i could see that neither he nor the captain paid much regard to mr.
Neither did i, to be sure, he was so loose a talker.
Yet in this case i believe he was really right and that nobody had told the situation of the island.
But i make it a point, it shall be kept secret even from me and mr.
Otherwise i would ask you to let me resign.
I see, said the doctor.
In other words, you fear a mutiny.
Sir, said captain smollett, with no intention to take offence, i deny your right to put words into my mouth.
No captain, sir, would be justified in going to sea at all if he had ground enough to say that.
Arrow, i believe him thoroughly honest.
Some of the men are the same.
All may be for what i know.
I see things going, as i think, not quite right.
And i ask you to take certain precautions or let me resign my berth.
Doctor, said the captain, you are smart.
When i came in here i meant to get discharged.
I had no thought that mr.
Trelawney would hear a word.
No more i would, cried the squire.
Had livesey not been here i should have seen you to the deuce.
As it is, i have heard you.
I will do as you desire, but i think the worse of you.
And with that he took his leave.
Silver, if you like, cried the squire.
Well, says the doctor, we shall see.
Arrow stood by superintending.
The new arrangement was quite to my liking.
The whole schooner had been overhauled.
And this set of cabins was only joined to the galley and forecastle by a sparred passage on the port side.
It had been originally meant that the captain, mr.
Arrow, hunter, joyce, the doctor, and the squire were to occupy these six berths.
Now redruth and i were to get two of them and mr.
Very low it was still, of course.
But there was room to swing two hammocks, and even the mate seemed pleased with the arrangement.
Even he, perhaps, had been doubtful as to the crew, but that is only guess, for as you shall hear, we had not long the benefit of his opinion.
The cook came up the side like a monkey for cleverness, and as soon as he saw what was doing, so ho, mates says he.
You may go below, my man.
Hands will want supper.
Aye, aye, sir, answered the cook, and touching his forelock, he disappeared at once in the direction of his galley.
Very likely, sir, replied captain smollett.
Blandly and the like, coming off to wish him a good voyage and a safe return.
We never had a night at the admiral benbow when i had half the work.
Now, barbecue, tip us a stave, cried one voice.
The old one, cried another.
Even at that exciting moment it carried me back to the old admiral benbow in a second, and i seemed to hear the voice of the captain piping in the chorus.
But soon the anchor was short up.
Soon it was hanging dripping at the bows.
Soon the sails began to draw, and the land and shipping to flit by on either side.
And before i could lie down to snatch an hour of slumber the hispaniola had begun her voyage to the isle of treasure.
I am not going to relate that voyage in detail.
It was fairly prosperous.
The ship proved to be a good ship, the crew were capable seamen, and the captain thoroughly understood his business.
But before we came the length of treasure island, two or three things had happened which require to be known.
Arrow, first of all, turned out even worse than the captain had feared.
He had no command among the men, and people did what they pleased with him.
But that was by no means the worst of it, for after a day or two at sea he began to appear on deck with hazy eye, red cheeks, stuttering tongue, and other marks of drunkenness.
Time after time he was ordered below in disgrace.
Sometimes he fell and cut himself.
Sometimes he lay all day long in his little bunk at one side of the companion.
Sometimes for a day or two he would be almost sober and attend to his work at least passably.
In the meantime, we could never make out where he got the drink.
Watch him as we pleased, we could do nothing to solve it.
And when we asked him to his face, he would only laugh if he were drunk, and if he were sober deny solemnly that he ever tasted anything but water.
He was not only useless as an officer and a bad influence amongst the men, but it was plain that at this rate he must soon kill himself outright, so nobody was much surprised, nor very sorry, when one dark night, with a head sea, he disappeared entirely and was seen no more.
Overboard said the captain.
Well, gentlemen, that saves the trouble of putting him in irons.
But there we were, without a mate.
And it was necessary, of course, to advance one of the men.
The boatswain, job anderson, was the likeliest man aboard, and though he kept his old title, he served in a way as mate.
Trelawney had followed the sea, and his knowledge made him very useful, for he often took a watch himself in easy weather.
And the coxswain, israel hands, was a careful, wily, old, experienced seaman who could be trusted at a pinch with almost anything.
Aboard ship he carried his crutch by a lanyard round his neck, to have both hands as free as possible.
It was something to see him wedge the foot of the crutch against a bulkhead, and propped against it, yielding to every movement of the ship, get on with his cooking like someone safe ashore.
Still more strange was it to see him in the heaviest of weather cross the deck.
And he would hand himself from one place to another, now using the crutch, now trailing it alongside by the lanyard, as quickly as another man could walk.
Yet some of the men who had sailed with him before expressed their pity to see him so reduced.
He had good schooling in his young days and can speak like a book when so minded.
All the crew respected and even obeyed him.
He had a way of talking to each and doing everybody some particular service.
To me he was unweariedly kind, and always glad to see me in the galley, which he kept as clean as a new pin, the dishes hanging up burnished and his parrot in a cage in one corner.
Come away, hawkins, he would say.
Come and have a yarn with john.
Nobody more welcome than yourself, my son.
Sit you down and hear the news.
She was at the fishing up of the wrecked plate ships.
And to look at her you would think she was a babby.
She would swear the same, in a manner of speaking, before chaplain.
And john would touch his forelock with a solemn way he had that made me think he was the best of men.
In the meantime, the squire and captain smollett were still on pretty distant terms with one another.
The squire made no bones about the matter.
He despised the captain.
The captain, on his part, never spoke but when he was spoken to, and then sharp and short and dry, and not a word wasted.
He owned, when driven into a corner, that he seemed to have been wrong about the crew, that some of them were as brisk as he wanted to see and all had behaved fairly well.
As for the ship, he had taken a downright fancy to her.
The squire, at this, would turn away and march up and down the deck, chin in air.
A trifle more of that man, he would say, and i shall explode.
We had some heavy weather, which only proved the qualities of the hispaniola.
Double grog was going on the least excuse.
Never knew good come of it yet, the captain said to dr.
Spoil forecastle hands, make devils.
But good did come of the apple barrel, as you shall hear, for if it had not been for that, we should have had no note of warning and might all have perished by the hand of treachery.
This was how it came about.
It was about the last day of our outward voyage by the largest computation.
Some time that night, or at latest before noon of the morrow, we should sight the treasure island.
We were heading s.s.w.
And had a steady breeze abeam and a quiet sea.
The hispaniola rolled steadily, dipping her bowsprit now and then with a whiff of spray.
All was drawing alow and aloft.
Everyone was in the bravest spirits because we were now so near an end of the first part of our adventure.
Now, just after sundown, when all my work was over and i was on my way to my berth, it occurred to me that i should like an apple.
The watch was all forward looking out for the island.
The man at the helm was watching the luff of the sail and whistling away gently to himself, and that was the only sound excepting the swish of the sea against the bows and around the sides of the ship.
In i got bodily into the apple barrel, and found there was scarce an apple left.
But sitting down there in the dark, what with the sound of the waters and the rocking movement of the ship, i had either fallen asleep or was on the point of doing so when a heavy man sat down with rather a clash close by.
The barrel shook as he leaned his shoulders against it, and i was just about to jump up when the man began to speak.
What i heard in the apple barrel no, not i, said silver.
I was quartermaster, along of my timber leg.
The same broadside i lost my leg, old pew lost his deadlights.
Now, what a ship was christened, so let her stay, i says.
So it was with the cassandra, as brought us all safe home from malabar, after england took the viceroy of the indies.
Ah cried another voice, that of the youngest hand on board, and evidently full of admiration.
He was the flower of the flock, was flint davis was a man too, by all accounts, said silver.
I never sailed along of him.
And now here on my own account, in a manner of speaking.
I laid by nine hundred safe, from england, and two thousand after flint.
Old pew, as had lost his sight, and might have thought shame, spends twelve hundred pound in a year, like a lord in parliament.
You may imagine how i felt when i heard this abominable old rogue addressing another in the very same words of flattery as he had used to myself.
I think, if i had been able, that i would have killed him through the barrel.
Meantime, he ran on, little supposing he was overheard.
Here it is about gentlemen of fortune.
Now, the most goes for rum and a good fling, and to sea again in their shirts.
I puts it all away, some here, some there, and none too much anywheres, by reason of suspicion.
Once back from this cruise, i set up gentleman in earnest.
Time enough too, says you.
Why, where might you suppose it was asked silver derisively.
At bristol, in banks and places, answered his companion.
It were, said the cook.
It were when we weighed anchor.
But my old missis has it all by now.
And can you trust your missis asked the other.
Gentlemen of fortune, returned the cook, usually trusts little among themselves, and right they are, you may lay to it.
But i have a way with me, i have.
There was some that was feared of pew, and some that was feared of flint.
But flint his own self was feared of me.
Feared he was, and proud.
The devil himself would have been feared to go to sea with them.
And a brave lad you were, and smart too, answered silver, shaking hands so heartily that all the barrel shook, and a finer figurehead for a gentleman of fortune i never clapped my eyes on.
By this time i had begun to understand the meaning of their terms.
But on this point i was soon to be relieved, for silver giving a little whistle, a third man strolled up and sat down by the party.
And he turned his quid and spat.
I want their pickles and wines, and that.
Leastways, your ears is big enough.
And you may lay to that, my son.
When by the powers cried silver.
Well then, i mean this squire and doctor shall find the stuff, and help us to get it aboard, by the powers.
But i know the sort you are.
And all for this same hurry and hurry and hurry.
You hear me i seen a thing or two at sea, i have.
But not you i know you.
Everybody knowed you was a kind of a chapling, john.
Flint was, and he died of rum at savannah.
Billy was the man for that, said israel.
He knows the long and short on it now.
And if ever a rough hand come to port, it was billy.
Right you are, said silver.
Dooty is dooty, mates.
You just jump up, like a sweet lad, and get me an apple, to wet my pipe like.
You may fancy the terror i was in i should have leaped out and run for it if i had found the strength, but my limbs and heart alike misgave me.
Dick, said silver, i trust you.
You fill a pannikin and bring it up.
Terrified as i was, i could not help thinking to myself that this must have been how mr.
Arrow got the strong waters that destroyed him.
Hence there were still faithful men on board.
And almost at the same time the voice of the lookout shouted, land ho council of war there was a great rush of feet across the deck.
Livesey in the rush for the weather bow.
There all hands were already congregated.
A belt of fog had lifted almost simultaneously with the appearance of the moon.
All three seemed sharp and conical in figure.
So much i saw, almost in a dream, for i had not yet recovered from my horrid fear of a minute or two before.
And then i heard the voice of captain smollett issuing orders.
The hispaniola was laid a couple of points nearer the wind and now sailed a course that would just clear the island on the east.
And now, men, said the captain, when all was sheeted home, has any one of you ever seen that land ahead i have, sir, said silver.
The anchorage is on the south, behind an islet, i fancy asked the captain.
Skeleton island they calls it.
It were a main place for pirates once, and a hand we had on board knowed all their names for it.
I have a chart here, says captain smollett.
Sharp as must have been his annoyance, silver had the strength of mind to hide it.
Yes, sir, said he, this is the spot, to be sure, and very prettily drawed out.
Who might have done that, i wonder the pirates were too ignorant, i reckon.
Right you was, sir, says he, to haul your wind and keep the weather of the island.
Thank you, my man, says captain smollett.
He did not know, to be sure, that i had overheard his council from the apple barrel, and yet i had by this time taken such a horror of his cruelty, duplicity, and power that i could scarce conceal a shudder when he laid his hand upon my arm.
Why, it makes me young again.
I was going to forget my timber leg, i was.
And clapping me in the friendliest way upon the shoulder, he hobbled off forward and went below.
Captain smollett, the squire, and dr.
While i was still casting about in my thoughts to find some probable excuse, dr.
Livesey called me to his side.
He had left his pipe below, and being a slave to tobacco, had meant that i should fetch it.
But as soon as i was near enough to speak and not to be overheard, i broke immediately, doctor, let me speak.
Get the captain and squire down to the cabin, and then make some pretence to send for me.
The doctor changed countenance a little, but next moment he was master of himself.
Thank you, jim, said he quite loudly, that was all i wanted to know, as if he had asked me a question.
And with that he turned on his heel and rejoined the other two.
They spoke together for a little, and though none of them started, or raised his voice, or so much as whistled, it was plain enough that dr.
Livesey had communicated my request, for the next thing that i heard was the captain giving an order to job anderson, and all hands were piped on deck.
This land that we have sighted is the place we have been sailing for.
But it rang out so full and hearty that i confess i could hardly believe these same men were plotting for our blood.
And this also was given with a will.
On the top of that the three gentlemen went below, and not long after, word was sent forward that jim hawkins was wanted in the cabin.
I found them all three seated round the table, a bottle of spanish wine and some raisins before them, and the doctor smoking away, with his wig on his lap, and that, i knew, was a sign that he was agitated.
Now, hawkins, said the squire, you have something to say.
Nobody interrupted me till i was done, nor did any one of the three of them make so much as a movement, but they kept their eyes upon my face from first to last.
And they made me sit down at table beside them, poured me out a glass of wine, filled my hands with raisins, and all three, one after the other, and each with a bow, drank my good health, and their service to me, for my luck and courage.
Now, captain, said the squire, you were right, and i was wrong.
I own myself an ass, and i await your orders.
No more an ass than i, sir, returned the captain.
I never heard of a crew that meant to mutiny but what showed signs before, for any man that had an eye in his head to see the mischief and take steps according.
But this crew, he added, beats me.
A very remarkable man.
I see three or four points, and with mr.
You, sir, are the captain.
It is for you to speak, says mr.
First point, began mr.
If i gave the word to go about, they would rise at once.
Third point, there are faithful hands.
We can count, i take it, on your own home servants, mr.
Trelawney as upon myself, declared the squire.
Three, reckoned the captain.
Ourselves make seven, counting hawkins here.
Those he had picked up for himself before he lit on silver.
Nay, replied the squire.
Hands was one of mine.
I did think i could have trusted hands, added the captain.
Sir, i could find it in my heart to blow the ship up.
Well, gentlemen, said the captain, the best that i can say is not much.
We must lay to, if you please, and keep a bright lookout.
It would be pleasanter to come to blows.
Jim here, said the doctor, can help us more than anyone.
The men are not shy with him, and jim is a noticing lad.
Hawkins, i put prodigious faith in you, added the squire.
I began to feel pretty desperate at this, for i felt altogether helpless.
And yet, by an odd train of circumstances, it was indeed through me that safety came.
And out of these seven one was a boy, so that the grown men on our side were six to their nineteen.
Part three my shore adventure how my shore adventure began the appearance of the island when i came on deck next morning was altogether changed.
But the general colouring was uniform and sad.
The hills ran up clear above the vegetation in spires of naked rock.
The hispaniola was rolling scuppers under in the ocean swell.
The booms were tearing at the blocks, the rudder was banging to and fro, and the whole ship creaking, groaning, and jumping like a manufactory.
I had to cling tight to the backstay, and the world turned giddily before my eyes, for though i was a good enough sailor when there was way on, this standing still and being rolled about like a bottle was a thing i never learned to stand without a qualm or so, above all in the morning, on an empty stomach.
And from the first look onward, i hated the very thought of treasure island.
I volunteered for one of the boats, where i had, of course, no business.
The heat was sweltering, and the men grumbled fiercely over their work.
Anderson was in command of my boat, and instead of keeping the crew in order, he grumbled as loud as the worst.
I thought this was a very bad sign, for up to that day the men had gone briskly and willingly about their business.
But the very sight of the island had relaxed the cords of discipline.
All the way in, long john stood by the steersman and conned the ship.
He knew the passage like the palm of his hand, and though the man in the chains got everywhere more water than was down in the chart, john never hesitated once.
We brought up just where the anchor was in the chart, about a third of a mile from each shore, the mainland on one side and skeleton island on the other.
The bottom was clean sand.
The plunge of our anchor sent up clouds of birds wheeling and crying over the woods, but in less than a minute they were down again and all was once more silent.
Two little rivers, or rather two swamps, emptied out into this pond, as you might call it.
And the foliage round that part of the shore had a kind of poisonous brightness.
From the ship we could see nothing of the house or stockade, for they were quite buried among trees.
And if it had not been for the chart on the companion, we might have been the first that had ever anchored there since the island arose out of the seas.
There was not a breath of air moving, nor a sound but that of the surf booming half a mile away along the beaches and against the rocks outside.
I observed the doctor sniffing and sniffing, like someone tasting a bad egg.
If the conduct of the men had been alarming in the boat, it became truly threatening when they had come aboard.
They lay about the deck growling together in talk.
The slightest order was received with a black look and grudgingly and carelessly obeyed.
Even the honest hands must have caught the infection, for there was not one man aboard to mend another.
And it was not only we of the cabin party who perceived the danger.
Long john was hard at work going from group to group, spending himself in good advice, and as for example no man could have shown a better.
He fairly outstripped himself in willingness and civility.
He was all smiles to everyone.
If an order were given, john would be on his crutch in an instant, with the cheeriest aye, aye, sir in the world.
And when there was nothing else to do, he kept up one song after another, as if to conceal the discontent of the rest.
Of all the gloomy features of that gloomy afternoon, this obvious anxiety on the part of long john appeared the worst.
We held a council in the cabin.
You see, sir, here it is.
I get a rough answer, do i not well, if i speak back, pikes will be going in two shakes.
And who is that asked the squire.
Silver, sir, returned the captain.
If they none of them go, well then, we hold the cabin, and god defend the right.
Loaded pistols were served out to all the sure men.
Hunter, joyce, and redruth were taken into our confidence and received the news with less surprise and a better spirit than we had looked for, and then the captain went on deck and addressed the crew.
You can take the gigs, and as many as please may go ashore for the afternoon.
The captain was too bright to be in the way.
He whipped out of sight in a moment, leaving silver to arrange the party, and i fancy it was as well he did so.
Had he been on deck, he could no longer so much as have pretended not to understand the situation.
It was as plain as day.
Silver was the captain, and a mighty rebellious crew he had of it.
And a few, being good fellows in the main, could neither be led nor driven any further.
It is one thing to be idle and skulk and quite another to take a ship and murder a number of innocent men.
At last, however, the party was made up.
Six fellows were to stay on board, and the remaining thirteen, including silver, began to embark.
Then it was that there came into my head the first of the mad notions that contributed so much to save our lives.
If six men were left by silver, it was plain our party could not take and fight the ship.
And since only six were left, it was equally plain that the cabin party had no present need of my assistance.
It occurred to me at once to go ashore.
No one took notice of me, only the bow oar saying, is that you, jim keep your head down.
But silver, from the other boat, looked sharply over and called out to know if that were me.
And from that moment i began to regret what i had done.
Jim, jim i heard him shouting.
But you may suppose i paid no heed.
Jumping, ducking, and breaking through, i ran straight before my nose till i could run no longer.
The first blow i was so pleased at having given the slip to long john that i began to enjoy myself and look around me with some interest on the strange land that i was in.
I had crossed a marshy tract full of willows, bulrushes, and odd, outlandish, swampy trees.
And i had now come out upon the skirts of an open piece of undulating, sandy country, about a mile long, dotted with a few pines and a great number of contorted trees, not unlike the oak in growth, but pale in the foliage, like willows.
On the far side of the open stood one of the hills, with two quaint, craggy peaks shining vividly in the sun.
I now felt for the first time the joy of exploration.
The isle was uninhabited.
My shipmates i had left behind, and nothing lived in front of me but dumb brutes and fowls.
I turned hither and thither among the trees.
Here and there were flowering plants, unknown to me.
Here and there i saw snakes, and one raised his head from a ledge of rock and hissed at me with a noise not unlike the spinning of a top.
Little did i suppose that he was a deadly enemy and that the noise was the famous rattle.
The thicket stretched down from the top of one of the sandy knolls, spreading and growing taller as it went, until it reached the margin of the broad, reedy fen, through which the nearest of the little rivers soaked its way into the anchorage.
All at once there began to go a sort of bustle among the bulrushes.
A wild duck flew up with a quack, another followed, and soon over the whole surface of the marsh a great cloud of birds hung screaming and circling in the air.
I judged at once that some of my shipmates must be drawing near along the borders of the fen.
Nor was i deceived, for soon i heard the very distant and low tones of a human voice, which, as i continued to give ear, grew steadily louder and nearer.
By the sound they must have been talking earnestly, and almost fiercely.
But no distinct word came to my hearing.
At last the speakers seemed to have paused and perhaps to have sat down, for not only did they cease to draw any nearer, but the birds themselves began to grow more quiet and to settle again to their places in the swamp.
And now i began to feel that i was neglecting my business, that since i had been so foolhardy as to come ashore with these desperadoes, the least i could do was to overhear them at their councils, and that my plain and obvious duty was to draw as close as i could manage, under the favourable ambush of the crouching trees.
I could tell the direction of the speakers pretty exactly, not only by the sound of their voices but by the behaviour of the few birds that still hung in alarm above the heads of the intruders.
Crawling on all fours, i made steadily but slowly towards them, till at last, raising my head to an aperture among the leaves, i could see clear down into a little green dell beside the marsh, and closely set about with trees, where long john silver and another of the crew stood face to face in conversation.
The sun beat full upon them.
Far away out in the marsh there arose, all of a sudden, a sound like the cry of anger, then another on the back of it.
Tom had leaped at the sound, like a horse at the spur, but silver had not winked an eye.
He stood where he was, resting lightly on his crutch, watching his companion like a snake about to spring.
John said the sailor, stretching out his hand.
Hands off cried silver, leaping back a yard, as it seemed to me, with the speed and security of a trained gymnast.
Hands off, if you like, john silver, said the other.
And at this point tom flashed out like a hero.
And with that, this brave fellow turned his back directly on the cook and set off walking for the beach.
But he was not destined to go far.
With a cry john seized the branch of a tree, whipped the crutch out of his armpit, and sent that uncouth missile hurtling through the air.
It struck poor tom, point foremost, and with stunning violence, right between the shoulders in the middle of his back.
His hands flew up, he gave a sort of gasp, and fell.
Whether he were injured much or little, none could ever tell.
Like enough, to judge from the sound, his back was broken on the spot.
But he had no time given him to recover.
Silver, agile as a monkey even without leg or crutch, was on the top of him next moment and had twice buried his knife up to the hilt in that defenceless body.
From my place of ambush, i could hear him pant aloud as he struck the blows.
I do not know what it rightly is to faint, but i do know that for the next little while the whole world swam away from before me in a whirling mist.
When i came again to myself the monster had pulled himself together, his crutch under his arm, his hat upon his head.
Just before him tom lay motionless upon the sward.
Everything else was unchanged, the sun still shining mercilessly on the steaming marsh and the tall pinnacle of the mountain, and i could scarce persuade myself that murder had been actually done and a human life cruelly cut short a moment since before my eyes.
But now john put his hand into his pocket, brought out a whistle, and blew upon it several modulated blasts that rang far across the heated air.
I could not tell, of course, the meaning of the signal, but it instantly awoke my fears.
More men would be coming.
I might be discovered.
They had already slain two of the honest people.
After tom and alan, might not i come next instantly i began to extricate myself and crawl back again, with what speed and silence i could manage, to the more open portion of the wood.
As i did so, i could hear hails coming and going between the old buccaneer and his comrades, and this sound of danger lent me wings.
As soon as i was clear of the thicket, i ran as i never ran before, scarce minding the direction of my flight, so long as it led me from the murderers.
And as i ran, fear grew and grew upon me until it turned into a kind of frenzy.
Mingled with these were a few scattered pines, some fifty, some nearer seventy, feet high.
The air too smelt more freshly than down beside the marsh.
And here a fresh alarm brought me to a standstill with a thumping heart.
The man of the island from the side of the hill, which was here steep and stony, a spout of gravel was dislodged and fell rattling and bounding through the trees.
My eyes turned instinctively in that direction, and i saw a figure leap with great rapidity behind the trunk of a pine.
What it was, whether bear or man or monkey, i could in no wise tell.
It seemed dark and shaggy.
But the terror of this new apparition brought me to a stand.
I was now, it seemed, cut off upon both sides.
Behind me the murderers, before me this lurking nondescript.
And immediately i began to prefer the dangers that i knew to those i knew not.
Silver himself appeared less terrible in contrast with this creature of the woods, and i turned on my heel, and looking sharply behind me over my shoulder, began to retrace my steps in the direction of the boats.
Instantly the figure reappeared, and making a wide circuit, began to head me off.
I was tired, at any rate.
But had i been as fresh as when i rose, i could see it was in vain for me to contend in speed with such an adversary.
From trunk to trunk the creature flitted like a deer, running manlike on two legs, but unlike any man that i had ever seen, stooping almost double as it ran.
Yet a man it was, i could no longer be in doubt about that.
I began to recall what i had heard of cannibals.
I was within an ace of calling for help.
But the mere fact that he was a man, however wild, had somewhat reassured me, and my fear of silver began to revive in proportion.
I stood still, therefore, and cast about for some method of escape.
And as i was so thinking, the recollection of my pistol flashed into my mind.
As soon as i remembered i was not defenceless, courage glowed again in my heart and i set my face resolutely for this man of the island and walked briskly towards him.
He was concealed by this time behind another tree trunk.
But he must have been watching me closely, for as soon as i began to move in his direction he reappeared and took a step to meet me.
Then he hesitated, drew back, came forward again, and at last, to my wonder and confusion, threw himself on his knees and held out his clasped hands in supplication.
At that i once more stopped.
Ben gunn, he answered, and his voice sounded hoarse and awkward, like a rusty lock.
I could now see that he was a white man like myself and that his features were even pleasing.
His skin, wherever it was exposed, was burnt by the sun.
Even his lips were black, and his fair eyes looked quite startling in so dark a face.
Were you shipwrecked nay, mate, said he.
I had heard the word, and i knew it stood for a horrible kind of punishment common enough among the buccaneers, in which the offender is put ashore with a little powder and shot and left behind on some desolate and distant island.
Marooned three years agone, he continued, and lived on goats since then, and berries, and oysters.
Wherever a man is, says i, a man can do for himself.
But, mate, my heart is sore for christian diet.
If ever i can get aboard again, said i, you shall have cheese by the stone.
All this time he had been feeling the stuff of my jacket, smoothing my hands, looking at my boots, and generally, in the intervals of his speech, showing a childish pleasure in the presence of a fellow creature.
But at my last words he perked up into a kind of startled slyness.
If ever you can get aboard again, says you he repeated.
And right you was, he cried.
Jim, jim, says he, quite pleased apparently.
Why, no, not in particular, i answered.
And so my mother told me, and predicked the whole, she did, the pious woman but it were providence that put me here.
I now felt sure that the poor fellow had gone crazy in his solitude, and i suppose i must have shown the feeling in my face, for he repeated the statement hotly rich rich i says.
At this i had a happy inspiration.
I began to believe that i had found an ally, and i answered him at once.
Worse luck for the rest of us.
He was still holding me by the wrist, and at that he give it quite a wring.
But where was you, do you suppose i had made my mind up in a moment, and by way of answer told him the whole story of our voyage and the predicament in which we found ourselves.
He heard me with the keenest interest, and when i had done he patted me on the head.
As it was, all hands were to share.
And a passage home he added with a look of great shrewdness.
And besides, if we got rid of the others, we should want you to help work the vessel home.
Ah, said he, so you would.
And he seemed very much relieved.
They was ashore nigh on a week, and us standing off and on in the old walrus.
One fine day up went the signal, and here come flint by himself in a little boat, and his head done up in a blue scarf.
The sun was getting up, and mortal white he looked about the cutwater.
How he done it, not a man aboard us could make out.
Billy bones was the mate.
Long john, he was quartermaster.
And they asked him where the treasure was.
Well, i was in another ship three years back, and we sighted this island.
Twelve days they looked for it, and every day they had the worse word for me, until one fine morning all hands went aboard.
Well, jim, three years have i been here, and not a bite of christian diet from that day to this.
But now, you look here.
Do i look like a man before the mast no, says you.
And with that he winked and pinched me hard.
Just you mention them words to your squire, jim, he went on.
Three years he were the man of this island, light and dark, fair and rain.
And he pinched me again in the most confidential manner.
I keep her under the white rock.
If the worst come to the worst, we might try that after dark.
They have begun to fight i cried.
And i began to run towards the anchorage, my terrors all forgotten, while close at my side the marooned man in his goatskins trotted easily and lightly.
You see the mounds i come here and prayed, nows and thens, when i thought maybe a sunday would be about doo.
So he kept talking as i ran, neither expecting nor receiving any answer.
Another pause, and then, not a quarter of a mile in front of me, i beheld the union jack flutter in the air above a wood.
The captain, the squire, and i were talking matters over in the cabin.
Had there been a breath of wind, we should have fallen on the six mutineers who were left aboard with us, slipped our cable, and away to sea.
But the wind was wanting.
And to complete our helplessness, down came hunter with the news that jim hawkins had slipped into a boat and was gone ashore with the rest.
It never occurred to us to doubt jim hawkins, but we were alarmed for his safety.
With the men in the temper they were in, it seemed an even chance if we should see the lad again.
The pitch was bubbling in the seams.
The nasty stench of the place turned me sick.
If ever a man smelt fever and dysentery, it was in that abominable anchorage.
The six scoundrels were sitting grumbling under a sail in the forecastle.
Ashore we could see the gigs made fast and a man sitting in each, hard by where the river runs in.
One of them was whistling lillibullero.
The gigs had leaned to their right, but hunter and i pulled straight in, in the direction of the stockade upon the chart.
The two who were left guarding their boats seemed in a bustle at our appearance.
Lillibullero stopped off, and i could see the pair discussing what they ought to do.
Had they gone and told silver, all might have turned out differently.
But they had their orders, i suppose, and decided to sit quietly where they were and hark back again to lillibullero.
There was a slight bend in the coast, and i steered so as to put it between us.
Even before we landed we had thus lost sight of the gigs.
I had not gone a hundred yards when i reached the stockade.
This was how it was a spring of clear water rose almost at the top of a knoll.
All round this they had cleared a wide space, and then the thing was completed by a paling six feet high, without door or opening, too strong to pull down without time and labour and too open to shelter the besiegers.
They stood quiet in shelter and shot the others like partridges.
All they wanted was a good watch and food.
For, short of a complete surprise, they might have held the place against a regiment.
What particularly took my fancy was the spring.
I was thinking this over when there came ringing over the island the cry of a man at the point of death.
Jim hawkins is gone, was my first thought.
It is something to have been an old soldier, but more still to have been a doctor.
By good fortune hunter pulled a good oar.
We made the water fly, and the boat was soon alongside and i aboard the schooner.
I found them all shaken, as was natural.
The squire was sitting down, as white as a sheet, thinking of the harm he had led us to, the good soul and one of the six forecastle hands was little better.
Another touch of the rudder and that man would join us.
I told my plan to the captain, and between us we settled on the details of its accomplishment.
We put old redruth in the gallery between the cabin and the forecastle, with three or four loaded muskets and a mattress for protection.
In the meantime, the squire and the captain stayed on deck, and the latter hailed the coxswain, who was the principal man aboard.
Hands, he said, here are two of us with a brace of pistols each.
They were a good deal taken aback, and after a little consultation one and all tumbled down the fore companion, thinking no doubt to take us on the rear.
But when they saw redruth waiting for them in the sparred galley, they went about ship at once, and a head popped out again on deck.
Down, dog cries the captain.
And the head popped back again.
This second trip fairly aroused the watchers along shore.
Lillibullero was dropped again.
And just before we lost sight of them behind the little point, one of them whipped ashore and disappeared.
I had half a mind to change my plan and destroy their boats, but i feared that silver and the others might be close at hand, and all might very well be lost by trying for too much.
We had soon touched land in the same place as before and set to provision the block house.
All three made the first journey, heavily laden, and tossed our stores over the palisade.
So we proceeded without pausing to take breath, till the whole cargo was bestowed, when the two servants took up their position in the block house, and i, with all my power, sculled back to the hispaniola.
That we should have risked a second boat load seems more daring than it really was.
They had the advantage of numbers, of course, but we had the advantage of arms.
The squire was waiting for me at the stern window, all his faintness gone from him.
He caught the painter and made it fast, and we fell to loading the boat for our very lives.
Pork, powder, and biscuit was the cargo, with only a musket and a cutlass apiece for the squire and me and redruth and the captain.
The rest of the arms and powder we dropped overboard in two fathoms and a half of water, so that we could see the bright steel shining far below us in the sun, on the clean, sandy bottom.
By this time the tide was beginning to ebb, and the ship was swinging round to her anchor.
Voices were heard faintly halloaing in the direction of the two gigs.
And though this reassured us for joyce and hunter, who were well to the eastward, it warned our party to be off.
Now, men, said he, do you hear me there was no answer from the forecastle.
Smollett, a little louder, i am leaving this ship, and i order you to follow your captain.
I have my watch here in my hand.
I give you thirty seconds to join me in.
Come, my fine fellow, continued the captain.
There was a sudden scuffle, a sound of blows, and out burst abraham gray with a knife cut on the side of the cheek, and came running to the captain like a dog to the whistle.
And the next moment he and the captain had dropped aboard of us, and we had shoved off and given way.
We were clear out of the ship, but not yet ashore in our stockade.
In the first place, the little gallipot of a boat that we were in was gravely overloaded.
The gunwale was lipping astern.
Several times we shipped a little water, and my breeches and the tails of my coat were all soaking wet before we had gone a hundred yards.
The captain made us trim the boat, and we got her to lie a little more evenly.
All the same, we were afraid to breathe.
If we let the current have its way we should come ashore beside the gigs, where the pirates might appear at any moment.
I cannot keep her head for the stockade, sir, said i to the captain.
I was steering, while he and redruth, two fresh men, were at the oars.
The tide keeps washing her down.
Could you pull a little stronger not without swamping the boat, said he.
I tried and found by experiment that the tide kept sweeping us westward until i had laid her head due east, or just about right angles to the way we ought to go.
We must keep upstream.
Whereas, the way we go the current must slacken, and then we can dodge back along the shore.
You can ease her off a bit.
Thank you, my man, said i, quite as if nothing had happened, for we had all quietly made up our minds to treat him like one of ourselves.
Suddenly the captain spoke up again, and i thought his voice was a little changed.
I have thought of that, said i, for i made sure he was thinking of a bombardment of the fort.
They could never get the gun ashore, and if they did, they could never haul it through the woods.
Look astern, doctor, replied the captain.
We had entirely forgotten the long nine.
And there, to our horror, were the five rogues busy about her, getting off her jacket, as they called the stout tarpaulin cover under which she sailed.
By this time we had got so far out of the run of the current that we kept steerage way even at our necessarily gentle rate of rowing, and i could keep her steady for the goal.
But the worst of it was that with the course i now held we turned our broadside instead of our stern to the hispaniola and offered a target like a barn door.
Trelawney, out and away, said i.
Trelawney, will you please pick me off one of these men, sir hands, if possible, said the captain.
Trelawney was as cool as steel.
He looked to the priming of his gun.
All hands stand by to trim her when he aims.
The squire raised his gun, the rowing ceased, and we leaned over to the other side to keep the balance, and all was so nicely contrived that we did not ship a drop.
They had the gun, by this time, slewed round upon the swivel, and hands, who was at the muzzle with the rammer, was in consequence the most exposed.
However, we had no luck, for just as trelawney fired, down he stooped, the ball whistled over him, and it was one of the other four who fell.
The cry he gave was echoed not only by his companions on board but by a great number of voices from the shore, and looking in that direction i saw the other pirates trooping out from among the trees and tumbling into their places in the boats.
Here come the gigs, sir, said i.
Give way, then, cried the captain.
Only one of the gigs is being manned, sir, i added.
The crew of the other most likely going round by shore to cut us off.
Jack ashore, you know.
In the meanwhile we had been making headway at a good pace for a boat so overloaded, and we had shipped but little water in the process.
Thirty or forty strokes and we should beach her, for the ebb had already disclosed a narrow belt of sand below the clustering trees.
The gig was no longer to be feared.
The little point had already concealed it from our eyes.
The one source of danger was the gun.
But it was plain that they meant nothing should delay their shot.
They had never so much as looked at their fallen comrade, though he was not dead, and i could see him trying to crawl away.
Ready cried the squire.
Hold cried the captain, quick as an echo.
And he and redruth backed with a great heave that sent her stern bodily under water.
The report fell in at the same instant of time.
Where the ball passed, not one of us precisely knew, but i fancy it must have been over our heads and that the wind of it may have contributed to our disaster.
At any rate, the boat sank by the stern, quite gently, in three feet of water, leaving the captain and myself, facing each other, on our feet.
The other three took complete headers, and came up again drenched and bubbling.
So far there was no great harm.
No lives were lost, and we could wade ashore in safety.
But there were all our stores at the bottom, and to make things worse, only two guns out of five remained in a state for service.
Mine i had snatched from my knees and held over my head, by a sort of instinct.
As for the captain, he had carried his over his shoulder by a bandoleer, and like a wise man, lock uppermost.
The other three had gone down with the boat.
Hunter was steady, that we knew.
Soon we could hear their footfalls as they ran and the cracking of the branches as they breasted across a bit of thicket.
I began to see we should have a brush for it in earnest and looked to my priming.
Captain, said i, trelawney is the dead shot.
They exchanged guns, and trelawney, silent and cool as he had been since the beginning of the bustle, hung a moment on his heel to see that all was fit for service.
At the same time, observing gray to be unarmed, i handed him my cutlass.
It did all our hearts good to see him spit in his hand, knit his brows, and make the blade sing through the air.
It was plain from every line of his body that our new hand was worth his salt.
Forty paces farther we came to the edge of the wood and saw the stockade in front of us.
They paused as if taken aback, and before they recovered, not only the squire and i, but hunter and joyce from the block house, had time to fire.
The four shots came in rather a scattering volley, but they did the business one of the enemy actually fell, and the rest, without hesitation, turned and plunged into the trees.
After reloading, we walked down the outside of the palisade to see to the fallen enemy.
We began to rejoice over our good success when just at that moment a pistol cracked in the bush, a ball whistled close past my ear, and poor tom redruth stumbled and fell his length on the ground.
Both the squire and i returned the shot, but as we had nothing to aim at, it is probable we only wasted powder.
Then we reloaded and turned our attention to poor tom.
The captain and gray were already examining him, and i saw with half an eye that all was over.
He had lain like a trojan behind his mattress in the gallery.
He had followed every order silently, doggedly, and well.
He was the oldest of our party by a score of years.
And now, sullen, old, serviceable servant, it was he that was to die.
The squire dropped down beside him on his knees and kissed his hand, crying like a child.
Be i going, doctor he asked.
I wish i had had a lick at them with the gun first, he replied.
Howsoever, so be it, amen after a little while of silence, he said he thought somebody might read a prayer.
And not long after, without another word, he passed away.
Then, climbing on the roof, he had with his own hand bent and run up the colours.
This seemed mightily to relieve him.
Then he pulled me aside.
Livesey, he said, in how many weeks do you and squire expect the consort i told him it was a question not of weeks but of months, that if we were not back by the end of august blandly was to send to find us, but neither sooner nor later.
You can calculate for yourself, i said.
Why, yes, returned the captain, scratching his head.
And making a large allowance, sir, for all the gifts of providence, i should say we were pretty close hauled.
How do you mean i asked.
And he pointed to the dead body under the flag.
At the second trial, the aim was better, and the ball descended inside the stockade, scattering a cloud of sand but doing no further damage.
Captain, said the squire, the house is quite invisible from the ship.
It must be the flag they are aiming at.
Would it not be wiser to take it in strike my colours cried the captain.
And as soon as he had said the words, i think we all agreed with him.
For it was not only a piece of stout, seamanly, good feeling.
It was good policy besides and showed our enemies that we despised their cannonade.
All through the evening they kept thundering away.
Ball after ball flew over or fell short or kicked up the sand in the enclosure, but they had to fire so high that the shot fell dead and buried itself in the soft sand.
There is one good thing about all this, observed the captain.
The wood in front of us is likely clear.
The ebb has made a good while.
Our stores should be uncovered.
Volunteers to go and bring in pork.
Gray and hunter were the first to come forward.
Well armed, they stole out of the stockade, but it proved a useless mission.
For four or five of them were busy carrying off our stores and wading out with them to one of the gigs that lay close by, pulling an oar or so to hold her steady against the current.
And every man of them was now provided with a musket from some secret magazine of their own.
The captain sat down to his log, and here is the beginning of the entry alexander smollett, master.
John trelawney, owner.
A hail on the land side.
Somebody hailing us, said hunter, who was on guard.
Doctor squire captain hullo, hunter, is that you came the cries.
And i ran to the door in time to see jim hawkins, safe and sound, come climbing over the stockade.
Narrative resumed by jim hawkins the garrison in the stockade as soon as ben gunn saw the colours he came to a halt, stopped me by the arm, and sat down.
And here they are ashore in the old stockade, as was made years and years ago by flint.
Ah, he was the man to have a headpiece, was flint barring rum, his match were never seen.
He were afraid of none, not he.
Well, said i, that may be so, and so be it.
All the more reason that i should hurry on and join my friends.
Nay, mate, returned ben, not you.
And he pinched me the third time with the same air of cleverness.
And when ben gunn is wanted, you know where to find him, jim.
Just wheer you found him today.
Is that all and when says you, he added.
Why, from about noon observation to about six bells.
Precious sight, and reasons of his own, says you.
As between man and man.
The next moment each of us had taken to his heels in a different direction.
For a good hour to come frequent reports shook the island, and balls kept crashing through the woods.
The sun had just set, the sea breeze was rustling and tumbling in the woods and ruffling the grey surface of the anchorage.
The tide, too, was far out, and great tracts of sand lay uncovered.
The air, after the heat of the day, chilled me through my jacket.
The hispaniola still lay where she had anchored.
It was the last of the cannonade.
I lay for some time watching the bustle which succeeded the attack.
Away, near the mouth of the river, a great fire was glowing among the trees, and between that point and the ship one of the gigs kept coming and going, the men, whom i had seen so gloomy, shouting at the oars like children.
But there was a sound in their voices which suggested rum.
At length i thought i might return towards the stockade.
And now, as i rose to my feet, i saw, some distance further down the spit and rising from among low bushes, an isolated rock, pretty high, and peculiarly white in colour.
It occurred to me that this might be the white rock of which ben gunn had spoken and that some day or other a boat might be wanted and i should know where to look for one.
Then i skirted among the woods until i had regained the rear, or shoreward side, of the stockade, and was soon warmly welcomed by the faithful party.
I had soon told my story and began to look about me.
The latter stood in several places as much as a foot or a foot and a half above the surface of the sand.
Little had been left besides the framework of the house, but in one corner there was a stone slab laid down by way of hearth and an old rusty iron basket to contain the fire.
The slopes of the knoll and all the inside of the stockade had been cleared of timber to build the house, and we could see by the stumps what a fine and lofty grove had been destroyed.
Most of the soil had been washed away or buried in drift after the removal of the trees.
Only where the streamlet ran down from the kettle a thick bed of moss and some ferns and little creeping bushes were still green among the sand.
The cold evening breeze, of which i have spoken, whistled through every chink of the rude building and sprinkled the floor with a continual rain of fine sand.
There was sand in our eyes, sand in our teeth, sand in our suppers, sand dancing in the spring at the bottom of the kettle, for all the world like porridge beginning to boil.
Our chimney was a square hole in the roof.
It was but a little part of the smoke that found its way out, and the rest eddied about the house and kept us coughing and piping the eye.
Add to this that gray, the new man, had his face tied up in a bandage for a cut he had got in breaking away from the mutineers and that poor old tom redruth, still unburied, lay along the wall, stiff and stark, under the union jack.
If we had been allowed to sit idle, we should all have fallen in the blues, but captain smollett was never the man for that.
All hands were called up before him, and he divided us into watches.
The doctor and gray and i for one.
The squire, hunter, and joyce upon the other.
Tired though we all were, two were sent out for firewood.
Two more were set to dig a grave for redruth.
The doctor was named cook.
I was put sentry at the door.
And the captain himself went from one to another, keeping up our spirits and lending a hand wherever it was wanted.
From time to time the doctor came to the door for a little air and to rest his eyes, which were almost smoked out of his head, and whenever he did so, he had a word for me.
That man smollett, he said once, is a better man than i am.
And when i say that it means a deal, jim.
Another time he came and was silent for a while.
Then he put his head on one side, and looked at me.
Is this ben gunn a man he asked.
I do not know, sir, said i.
Was it cheese you said he had a fancy for yes, sir, cheese, i answered.
Well, jim, says he, just see the good that comes of being dainty in your food.
Then, when we had eaten our pork and each had a good stiff glass of brandy grog, the three chiefs got together in a corner to discuss our prospects.
But our best hope, it was decided, was to kill off the buccaneers until they either hauled down their flag or ran away with the hispaniola.
Every time we had a crack at them, we were to take it, saving our own lives, with the extremest care.
As for the first, though we were about half a mile away, we could hear them roaring and singing late into the night.
And as for the second, the doctor staked his wig that, camped where they were in the marsh and unprovided with remedies, the half of them would be on their backs before a week.
First ship that ever i lost, said captain smollett.
I was dead tired, as you may fancy.
And when i got to sleep, which was not till after a great deal of tossing, i slept like a log of wood.
The rest had long been up and had already breakfasted and increased the pile of firewood by about half as much again when i was wakened by a bustle and the sound of voices.
Flag of truce i heard someone say.
And then, immediately after, with a cry of surprise, silver himself and at that, up i jumped, and rubbing my eyes, ran to a loophole in the wall.
The sky was bright and cloudless overhead, and the tops of the trees shone rosily in the sun.
The chill and the vapour taken together told a poor tale of the island.
It was plainly a damp, feverish, unhealthy spot.
Keep indoors, men, said the captain.
Ten to one this is a trick.
Then he hailed the buccaneer.
Who goes stand, or we fire.
Flag of truce, cried silver.
The captain was in the porch, keeping himself carefully out of the way of a treacherous shot, should any be intended.
Livesey take the north side, if you please.
The watch below, all hands to load muskets.
Lively, men, and careful.
And then he turned again to the mutineers.
And what do you want with your flag of truce he cried.
This time it was the other man who replied.
My man, said captain smollett, i have not the slightest desire to talk to you.
I know a gentleman, and you may lay to that.
We could see the man who carried the flag of truce attempting to hold silver back.
But silver laughed at him aloud and slapped him on the back as if the idea of alarm had been absurd.
Then he advanced to the stockade, threw over his crutch, got a leg up, and with great vigour and skill succeeded in surmounting the fence and dropping safely to the other side.
I will confess that i was far too much taken up with what was going on to be of the slightest use as sentry.
Indeed, i had already deserted my eastern loophole and crept up behind the captain, who had now seated himself on the threshold, with his elbows on his knees, his head in his hands, and his eyes fixed on the water as it bubbled out of the old iron kettle in the sand.
He was whistling come, lasses and lads.
Silver had terrible hard work getting up the knoll.
What with the steepness of the incline, the thick tree stumps, and the soft sand, he and his crutch were as helpless as a ship in stays.
But he stuck to it like a man in silence, and at last arrived before the captain, whom he saluted in the handsomest style.
He was tricked out in his best.
An immense blue coat, thick with brass buttons, hung as low as to his knees, and a fine laced hat was set on the back of his head.
Here you are, my man, said the captain, raising his head.
You had better sit down.
Why, silver, said the captain, if you had pleased to be an honest man, you might have been sitting in your galley.
A sweet pretty place you have of it here.
Why, there you all are together like a happy family, in a manner of speaking.
If you have anything to say, my man, better say it, said the captain.
Dooty is dooty, to be sure.
Well now, you look here, that was a good lay of yours last night.
Maybe i was shook myself.
Well says captain smollett as cool as can be.
All that silver said was a riddle to him, but you would never have guessed it from his tone.
As for me, i began to have an inkling.
I began to suppose that he had paid the buccaneers a visit while they all lay drunk together round their fire, and i reckoned up with glee that we had only fourteen enemies to deal with.
Well, here it is, said silver.
Oh, well, you have, i know that, returned long john.
What i mean is, we want your chart.
Now, i never meant you no harm, myself.
And the captain looked at him calmly and proceeded to fill a pipe.
Gray told me nothing, and i asked him nothing.
This little whiff of temper seemed to cool silver down.
He had been growing nettled before, but now he pulled himself together.
I would set no limits to what gentlemen might consider shipshape, or might not, as the case were.
And he filled a pipe and lighted it.
And the two men sat silently smoking for quite a while, now looking each other in the face, now stopping their tobacco, now leaning forward to spit.
It was as good as the play to see them.
Now, resumed silver, here it is.
You give us the chart to get the treasure by, and drop shooting poor seamen and stoving of their heads in while asleep.
Captain smollett rose from his seat and knocked out the ashes of his pipe in the palm of his left hand.
Every last word, by thunder answered john.
Very good, said the captain.
I stand here and tell you so.
Bundle out of this, please, hand over hand, and double quick.
His eyes started in his head with wrath.
He shook the fire out of his pipe.
Give me a hand up he cried.
Not i, returned the captain.
Not a man among us moved.
Growling the foulest imprecations, he crawled along the sand till he got hold of the porch and could hoist himself again upon his crutch.
Then he spat into the spring.
And with a dreadful oath he stumbled off, ploughed down the sand, was helped across the stockade, after four or five failures, by the man with the flag of truce, and disappeared in an instant afterwards among the trees.
The attack as soon as silver disappeared, the captain, who had been closely watching him, turned towards the interior of the house and found not a man of us at his post but gray.
It was the first time we had ever seen him angry.
The captain looked on for a while in silence.
And a minute ago i should have said we fought with discipline.
Then he went the rounds and saw, as he said, that all was clear.
On the two short sides of the house, east and west, there were only two loopholes.
On the south side where the porch was, two again.
And on the north side, five.
There was a round score of muskets for the seven of us.
In the middle, the cutlasses lay ranged.
Toss out the fire, said the captain.
Trelawney, and the embers smothered among sand.
Hawkins, help yourself, and back to your post to eat it, continued captain smollett.
Hunter, serve out a round of brandy to all hands.
And while this was going on, the captain completed, in his own mind, the plan of the defence.
Doctor, you will take the door, he resumed.
Keep within, and fire through the porch.
Hunter, take the east side, there.
Joyce, you stand by the west, my man.
If they can get up to it and fire in upon us through our own ports, things would begin to look dirty.
Hawkins, neither you nor i are much account at the shooting.
As the captain had said, the chill was past.
As soon as the sun had climbed above our girdle of trees, it fell with all its force upon the clearing and drank up the vapours at a draught.
Soon the sand was baking and the resin melting in the logs of the block house.
Jackets and coats were flung aside, shirts thrown open at the neck and rolled up to the shoulders.
And we stood there, each at his post, in a fever of heat and anxiety.
Hang them said the captain.
This is as dull as the doldrums.
Gray, whistle for a wind.
And just at that moment came the first news of the attack.
If you please, sir, said joyce, if i see anyone, am i to fire i told you so cried the captain.
Thank you, sir, returned joyce with the same quiet civility.
So some seconds passed, till suddenly joyce whipped up his musket and fired.
The report had scarcely died away ere it was repeated and repeated from without in a scattering volley, shot behind shot, like a string of geese, from every side of the enclosure.
And as the smoke cleared away and vanished, the stockade and the woods around it looked as quiet and empty as before.
Did you hit your man asked the captain.
No, sir, replied joyce.
Next best thing to tell the truth, muttered captain smollett.
Load his gun, hawkins.
How many should say there were on your side, doctor i know precisely, said dr.
Three shots were fired on this side.
Three repeated the captain.
And how many on yours, mr.
Trelawney but this was not so easily answered.
From the east and west only a single shot had been fired.
It was plain, therefore, that the attack would be developed from the north and that on the other three sides we were only to be annoyed by a show of hostilities.
But captain smollett made no change in his arrangements.
If the mutineers succeeded in crossing the stockade, he argued, they would take possession of any unprotected loophole and shoot us down like rats in our own stronghold.
Nor had we much time left to us for thought.
Suddenly, with a loud huzza, a little cloud of pirates leaped from the woods on the north side and ran straight on the stockade.
The boarders swarmed over the fence like monkeys.
Squire and gray fired again and yet again.
Three men fell, one forwards into the enclosure, two back on the outside.
But of these, one was evidently more frightened than hurt, for he was on his feet again in a crack and instantly disappeared among the trees.
The four who had boarded made straight before them for the building, shouting as they ran, and the men among the trees shouted back to encourage them.
Several shots were fired, but such was the hurry of the marksmen that not one appears to have taken effect.
In a moment, the four pirates had swarmed up the mound and were upon us.
The head of job anderson, the boatswain, appeared at the middle loophole.
Meanwhile a third, running unharmed all around the house, appeared suddenly in the doorway and fell with his cutlass on the doctor.
Our position was utterly reversed.
A moment since we were firing, under cover, at an exposed enemy.
Now it was we who lay uncovered and could not return a blow.
I snatched a cutlass from the pile, and someone, at the same time snatching another, gave me a cut across the knuckles which i hardly felt.
I dashed out of the door into the clear sunlight.
Someone was close behind, i knew not whom.
Right in front, the doctor was pursuing his assailant down the hill, and just as my eyes fell upon him, beat down his guard and sent him sprawling on his back with a great slash across the face.
Round the house, lads round the house cried the captain.
Mechanically, i obeyed, turned eastwards, and with my cutlass raised, ran round the corner of the house.
Next moment i was face to face with anderson.
He roared aloud, and his hanger went up above his head, flashing in the sunlight.
I had not time to be afraid, but as the blow still hung impending, leaped in a trice upon one side, and missing my foot in the soft sand, rolled headlong down the slope.
When i had first sallied from the door, the other mutineers had been already swarming up the palisade to make an end of us.
And yet, in this breath of time, the fight was over and the victory was ours.
Gray, following close behind me, had cut down the big boatswain ere he had time to recover from his last blow.
Another had been shot at a loophole in the very act of firing into the house and now lay in agony, the pistol still smoking in his hand.
A third, as i had seen, the doctor had disposed of at a blow.
Of the four who had scaled the palisade, one only remained unaccounted for, and he, having left his cutlass on the field, was now clambering out again with the fear of death upon him.
And you, lads, back into cover.
But his words were unheeded, no shot was fired, and the last boarder made good his escape and disappeared with the rest into the wood.
In three seconds nothing remained of the attacking party but the five who had fallen, four on the inside and one on the outside of the palisade.
The doctor and gray and i ran full speed for shelter.
The survivors would soon be back where they had left their muskets, and at any moment the fire might recommence.
The house was by this time somewhat cleared of smoke, and we saw at a glance the price we had paid for victory.
Hunter lay beside his loophole, stunned.
Joyce by his, shot through the head, never to move again.
While right in the centre, the squire was supporting the captain, one as pale as the other.
Have they run asked mr.
All that could, you may be bound, returned the doctor.
Five cried the captain.
Five against three leaves us four to nine.
Trelawney on board the schooner died that same evening of his wound.
But this was, of course, not known till after by the faithful party.
They had got their rations for that day, as the captain put it, and we had the place to ourselves and a quiet time to overhaul the wounded and get dinner.
And of these, the first two were as good as dead.
He lingered all day, breathing loudly like the old buccaneer at home in his apoplectic fit, but the bones of his chest had been crushed by the blow and his skull fractured in falling, and some time in the following night, without sign or sound, he went to his maker.
As for the captain, his wounds were grievous indeed, but not dangerous.
No organ was fatally injured.
The second had only torn and displaced some muscles in the calf.
He was sure to recover, the doctor said, but in the meantime, and for weeks to come, he must not walk nor move his arm, nor so much as speak when he could help it.
Doctor livesey patched it up with plaster and pulled my ears for me into the bargain.
Gray and i were sitting together at the far end of the block house, to be out of earshot of our officers consulting.
Why, in the name of davy jones, said he, is dr.
Livesey mad why no, says i.
Well, shipmate, said gray, mad he may not be.
I take it, replied i, the doctor has his idea.
I was right, as appeared later.
But in the meantime, the house being stifling hot and the little patch of sand inside the palisade ablaze with midday sun, i began to get another thought into my head, which was not by any means so right.
What i began to do was to envy the doctor walking in the cool shadow of the woods with the birds about him and the pleasant smell of the pines, while i sat grilling, with my clothes stuck to the hot resin, and so much blood about me and so many poor dead bodies lying all around that i took a disgust of the place that was almost as strong as fear.
But i was determined to do it with all the precautions in my power.
These biscuits, should anything befall me, would keep me, at least, from starving till far on in the next day.
As for the scheme i had in my head, it was not a bad one in itself.
I was to go down the sandy spit that divides the anchorage on the east from the open sea, find the white rock i had observed last evening, and ascertain whether it was there or not that ben gunn had hidden his boat, a thing quite worth doing, as i still believe.
But as i was certain i should not be allowed to leave the enclosure, my only plan was to take french leave and slip out when nobody was watching, and that was so bad a way of doing it as made the thing itself wrong.
But i was only a boy, and i had made my mind up.
Well, as things at last fell out, i found an admirable opportunity.
The squire and gray were busy helping the captain with his bandages, the coast was clear, i made a bolt for it over the stockade and into the thickest of the trees, and before my absence was observed i was out of cry of my companions.
This was my second folly, far worse than the first, as i left but two sound men to guard the house.
But like the first, it was a help towards saving all of us.
I took my way straight for the east coast of the island, for i was determined to go down the sea side of the spit to avoid all chance of observation from the anchorage.
It was already late in the afternoon, although still warm and sunny.
As i continued to thread the tall woods, i could hear from far before me not only the continuous thunder of the surf, but a certain tossing of foliage and grinding of boughs which showed me the sea breeze had set in higher than usual.
Soon cool draughts of air began to reach me, and a few steps farther i came forth into the open borders of the grove, and saw the sea lying blue and sunny to the horizon and the surf tumbling and tossing its foam along the beach.
I have never seen the sea quiet round treasure island.
The sun might blaze overhead, the air be without a breath, the surface smooth and blue, but still these great rollers would be running along all the external coast, thundering and thundering by day and night.
And i scarce believe there is one spot in the island where a man would be out of earshot of their noise.
I walked along beside the surf with great enjoyment, till, thinking i was now got far enough to the south, i took the cover of some thick bushes and crept warily up to the ridge of the spit.
Behind me was the sea, in front the anchorage.
The sea breeze, as though it had the sooner blown itself out by its unusual violence, was already at an end.
And the anchorage, under lee of skeleton island, lay still and leaden as when first we entered it.
The hispaniola, in that unbroken mirror, was exactly portrayed from the truck to the waterline, the jolly roger hanging from her peak.
I saw i must lose no time if i were to find the boat that evening.
The white rock, visible enough above the brush, was still some eighth of a mile further down the spit, and it took me a goodish while to get up with it, crawling, often on all fours, among the scrub.
Night had almost come when i laid my hand on its rough sides.
There was one thwart set as low as possible, a kind of stretcher in the bows, and a double paddle for propulsion.
But the great advantage of the coracle it certainly possessed, for it was exceedingly light and portable.
Well, now that i had found the boat, you would have thought i had had enough of truantry for once, but in the meantime i had taken another notion and become so obstinately fond of it that i would have carried it out, i believe, in the teeth of captain smollett himself.
This was to slip out under cover of the night, cut the hispaniola adrift, and let her go ashore where she fancied.
I had quite made up my mind that the mutineers, after their repulse of the morning, had nothing nearer their hearts than to up anchor and away to sea.
This, i thought, it would be a fine thing to prevent, and now that i had seen how they left their watchmen unprovided with a boat, i thought it might be done with little risk.
Down i sat to wait for darkness, and made a hearty meal of biscuit.
It was a night out of ten thousand for my purpose.
The fog had now buried all heaven.
As the last rays of daylight dwindled and disappeared, absolute blackness settled down on treasure island.
And when, at last, i shouldered the coracle and groped my way stumblingly out of the hollow where i had supped, there were but two points visible on the whole anchorage.
One was the great fire on shore, by which the defeated pirates lay carousing in the swamp.
The other, a mere blur of light upon the darkness, indicated the position of the anchored ship.
The ebb had already run some time, and i had to wade through a long belt of swampy sand, where i sank several times above the ankle, before i came to the edge of the retreating water, and wading a little way in, with some strength and dexterity, set my coracle, keel downwards, on the surface.
Do as you pleased, she always made more leeway than anything else, and turning round and round was the manoeuvre she was best at.
Even ben gunn himself has admitted that she was queer to handle till you knew her way.
Certainly i did not know her way.
She turned in every direction but the one i was bound to go.
The most part of the time we were broadside on, and i am very sure i never should have made the ship at all but for the tide.
By good fortune, paddle as i pleased, the tide was still sweeping me down.
And there lay the hispaniola right in the fairway, hardly to be missed.
First she loomed before me like a blot of something yet blacker than darkness, then her spars and hull began to take shape, and the next moment, as it seemed for, the farther i went, the brisker grew the current of the ebb , i was alongside of her hawser and had laid hold.
The hawser was as taut as a bowstring, and the current so strong she pulled upon her anchor.
All round the hull, in the blackness, the rippling current bubbled and chattered like a little mountain stream.
So far so good, but it next occurred to my recollection that a taut hawser, suddenly cut, is a thing as dangerous as a kicking horse.
Ten to one, if i were so foolhardy as to cut the hispaniola from her anchor, i and the coracle would be knocked clean out of the water.
This brought me to a full stop, and if fortune had not again particularly favoured me, i should have had to abandon my design.
Just while i was meditating, a puff came, caught the hispaniola, and forced her up into the current.
And to my great joy, i felt the hawser slacken in my grasp, and the hand by which i held it dip for a second under water.
With that i made my mind up, took out my gully, opened it with my teeth, and cut one strand after another, till the vessel swung only by two.
Then i lay quiet, waiting to sever these last when the strain should be once more lightened by a breath of wind.
All this time i had heard the sound of loud voices from the cabin, but to say truth, my mind had been so entirely taken up with other thoughts that i had scarcely given ear.
Now, however, when i had nothing else to do, i began to pay more heed.
Both men were plainly the worse of drink, and they were still drinking, for even while i was listening, one of them, with a drunken cry, opened the stern window and threw out something, which i divined to be an empty bottle.
But they were not only tipsy.
It was plain that they were furiously angry.
Oaths flew like hailstones, and every now and then there came forth such an explosion as i thought was sure to end in blows.
But each time the quarrel passed off and the voices grumbled lower for a while, until the next crisis came and in its turn passed away without result.
And i thought it was a ditty rather too dolefully appropriate for a company that had met such cruel losses in the morning.
But, indeed, from what i saw, all these buccaneers were as callous as the sea they sailed on.
At last the breeze came.
The schooner sidled and drew nearer in the dark.
I felt the hawser slacken once more, and with a good, tough effort, cut the last fibres through.
The breeze had but little action on the coracle, and i was almost instantly swept against the bows of the hispaniola.
At the same time, the schooner began to turn upon her heel, spinning slowly, end for end, across the current.
I wrought like a fiend, for i expected every moment to be swamped.
And since i found i could not push the coracle directly off, i now shoved straight astern.
At length i was clear of my dangerous neighbour, and just as i gave the last impulsion, my hands came across a light cord that was trailing overboard across the stern bulwarks.
Instantly i grasped it.
Why i should have done so i can hardly say.
It was at first mere instinct, but once i had it in my hands and found it fast, curiosity began to get the upper hand, and i determined i should have one look through the cabin window.
I pulled in hand over hand on the cord, and when i judged myself near enough, rose at infinite risk to about half my height and thus commanded the roof and a slice of the interior of the cabin.
By this time the schooner and her little consort were gliding pretty swiftly through the water.
The ship was talking, as sailors say, loudly, treading the innumerable ripples with an incessant weltering splash.
One glance, however, was sufficient.
And it was only one glance that i durst take from that unsteady skiff.
I dropped upon the thwart again, none too soon, for i was near overboard.
I could see nothing for the moment but these two furious, encrimsoned faces swaying together under the smoky lamp, and i shut my eyes to let them grow once more familiar with the darkness.
At the same moment, she yawed sharply and seemed to change her course.
The speed in the meantime had strangely increased.
I opened my eyes at once.
All round me were little ripples, combing over with a sharp, bristling sound and slightly phosphorescent.
The hispaniola herself, a few yards in whose wake i was still being whirled along, seemed to stagger in her course, and i saw her spars toss a little against the blackness of the night.
Nay, as i looked longer, i made sure she also was wheeling to the southward.
I glanced over my shoulder, and my heart jumped against my ribs.
The current had turned at right angles, sweeping round along with it the tall schooner and the little dancing coracle.
Ever quickening, ever bubbling higher, ever muttering louder, it went spinning through the narrows for the open sea.
Suddenly the schooner in front of me gave a violent yaw, turning, perhaps, through twenty degrees.
And almost at the same moment one shout followed another from on board.
I could hear feet pounding on the companion ladder and i knew that the two drunkards had at last been interrupted in their quarrel and awakened to a sense of their disaster.
I lay down flat in the bottom of that wretched skiff and devoutly recommended my spirit to its maker.
At the end of the straits, i made sure we must fall into some bar of raging breakers, where all my troubles would be ended speedily.
And though i could, perhaps, bear to die, i could not bear to look upon my fate as it approached.
So i must have lain for hours, continually beaten to and fro upon the billows, now and again wetted with flying sprays, and never ceasing to expect death at the next plunge.
Gradually weariness grew upon me.
I was scarce a quarter of a mile to seaward, and it was my first thought to paddle in and land.
That notion was soon given over.
Among the fallen rocks the breakers spouted and bellowed.
Loud reverberations, heavy sprays flying and falling, succeeded one another from second to second.
And i saw myself, if i ventured nearer, dashed to death upon the rough shore or spending my strength in vain to scale the beetling crags.
I have understood since that they were sea lions, and entirely harmless.
I felt willing rather to starve at sea than to confront such perils.
In the meantime i had a better chance, as i supposed, before me.
North of haulbowline head, the land runs in a long way, leaving at low tide a long stretch of yellow sand.
There was a great, smooth swell upon the sea.
The wind blowing steady and gentle from the south, there was no contrariety between that and the current, and the billows rose and fell unbroken.
Had it been otherwise, i must long ago have perished.
But as it was, it is surprising how easily and securely my little and light boat could ride.
Often, as i still lay at the bottom and kept no more than an eye above the gunwale, i would see a big blue summit heaving close above me.
Yet the coracle would but bounce a little, dance as if on springs, and subside on the other side into the trough as lightly as a bird.
I began after a little to grow very bold and sat up to try my skill at paddling.
But even a small change in the disposition of the weight will produce violent changes in the behaviour of a coracle.
And i had hardly moved before the boat, giving up at once her gentle dancing movement, ran straight down a slope of water so steep that it made me giddy, and struck her nose, with a spout of spray, deep into the side of the next wave.
I was drenched and terrified, and fell instantly back into my old position, whereupon the coracle seemed to find her head again and led me as softly as before among the billows.
It was plain she was not to be interfered with, and at that rate, since i could in no way influence her course, what hope had i left of reaching land i began to be horribly frightened, but i kept my head, for all that.
Then, getting my eye once more above the gunwale, i set myself to study how it was she managed to slip so quietly through the rollers.
The coracle, left to herself, turning from side to side, threaded, so to speak, her way through these lower parts and avoided the steep slopes and higher, toppling summits of the wave.
Well, now, thought i to myself, it is plain i must lie where i am and not disturb the balance.
But it is plain also that i can put the paddle over the side and from time to time, in smooth places, give her a shove or two towards land.
No sooner thought upon than done.
There i lay on my elbows in the most trying attitude, and every now and again gave a weak stroke or two to turn her head to shore.
It was very tiring and slow work, yet i did visibly gain ground.
And as we drew near the cape of the woods, though i saw i must infallibly miss that point, i had still made some hundred yards of easting.
I was, indeed, close in.
It was high time, for i now began to be tortured with thirst.
The sight of the trees so near at hand had almost made me sick with longing, but the current had soon carried me past the point, and as the next reach of sea opened out, i beheld a sight that changed the nature of my thoughts.
Right in front of me, not half a mile away, i beheld the hispaniola under sail.
I made sure, of course, that i should be taken.
But i was so distressed for want of water that i scarce knew whether to be glad or sorry at the thought, and long before i had come to a conclusion, surprise had taken entire possession of my mind and i could do nothing but stare and wonder.
When i first sighted her, all her sails were drawing.
Presently she began to fetch more and more to the westward, so that i thought they had sighted me and were going about in chase.
Clumsy fellows, said i.
They must still be drunk as owls.
And i thought how captain smollett would have set them skipping.
Again and again was this repeated.
To and fro, up and down, north, south, east, and west, the hispaniola sailed by swoops and dashes, and at each repetition ended as she had begun, with idly flapping canvas.
It became plain to me that nobody was steering.
And if so, where were the men either they were dead drunk or had deserted her, i thought, and perhaps if i could get on board i might return the vessel to her captain.
The current was bearing coracle and schooner southward at an equal rate.
If only i dared to sit up and paddle, i made sure that i could overhaul her.
The scheme had an air of adventure that inspired me, and the thought of the water breaker beside the fore companion doubled my growing courage.
Up i got, was welcomed almost instantly by another cloud of spray, but this time stuck to my purpose and set myself, with all my strength and caution, to paddle after the unsteered hispaniola.
Once i shipped a sea so heavy that i had to stop and bail, with my heart fluttering like a bird, but gradually i got into the way of the thing and guided my coracle among the waves, with only now and then a blow upon her bows and a dash of foam in my face.
I was now gaining rapidly on the schooner.
I could see the brass glisten on the tiller as it banged about, and still no soul appeared upon her decks.
I could not choose but suppose she was deserted.
If not, the men were lying drunk below, where i might batten them down, perhaps, and do what i chose with the ship.
She headed nearly due south, yawing, of course, all the time.
Each time she fell off, her sails partly filled, and these brought her in a moment right to the wind again.
I have said this was the worst thing possible for me, for helpless as she looked in this situation, with the canvas cracking like cannon and the blocks trundling and banging on the deck, she still continued to run away from me, not only with the speed of the current, but by the whole amount of her leeway, which was naturally great.
But now, at last, i had my chance.
The breeze fell for some seconds, very low, and the current gradually turning her, the hispaniola revolved slowly round her centre and at last presented me her stern, with the cabin window still gaping open and the lamp over the table still burning on into the day.
For the last little while i had even lost, but now redoubling my efforts, i began once more to overhaul the chase.
I was not a hundred yards from her when the wind came again in a clap.
She filled on the port tack and was off again, stooping and skimming like a swallow.
My first impulse was one of despair, but my second was towards joy.
I could see the waves boiling white under her forefoot.
Immensely tall she looked to me from my low station in the coracle.
And then, of a sudden, i began to comprehend.
I was on the summit of one swell when the schooner came stooping over the next.
The bowsprit was over my head.
I sprang to my feet and leaped, stamping the coracle under water.
And as i still clung there panting, a dull blow told me that the schooner had charged down upon and struck the coracle and that i was left without retreat on the hispaniola.
I strike the jolly roger i had scarce gained a position on the bowsprit when the flying jib flapped and filled upon the other tack, with a report like a gun.
The schooner trembled to her keel under the reverse, but next moment, the other sails still drawing, the jib flapped back again and hung idle.
This had nearly tossed me off into the sea.
And now i lost no time, crawled back along the bowsprit, and tumbled head foremost on the deck.
Not a soul was to be seen.
The planks, which had not been swabbed since the mutiny, bore the print of many feet, and an empty bottle, broken by the neck, tumbled to and fro like a live thing in the scuppers.
Suddenly the hispaniola came right into the wind.
Israel hands propped against the bulwarks, his chin on his chest, his hands lying open before him on the deck, his face as white, under its tan, as a tallow candle.
For a while the ship kept bucking and sidling like a vicious horse, the sails filling, now on one tack, now on another, and the boom swinging to and fro till the mast groaned aloud under the strain.
At every jump too, hands appeared still more to sink into himself and settle down upon the deck, his feet sliding ever the farther out, and the whole body canting towards the stern, so that his face became, little by little, hid from me.
And at last i could see nothing beyond his ear and the frayed ringlet of one whisker.
At the same time, i observed, around both of them, splashes of dark blood upon the planks and began to feel sure that they had killed each other in their drunken wrath.
While i was thus looking and wondering, in a calm moment, when the ship was still, israel hands turned partly round and with a low moan writhed himself back to the position in which i had seen him first.
The moan, which told of pain and deadly weakness, and the way in which his jaw hung open went right to my heart.
But when i remembered the talk i had overheard from the apple barrel, all pity left me.
Hands, i said ironically.
He rolled his eyes round heavily, but he was too far gone to express surprise.
All he could do was to utter one word, brandy.
It occurred to me there was no time to lose, and dodging the boom as it once more lurched across the deck, i slipped aft and down the companion stairs into the cabin.
It was such a scene of confusion as you can hardly fancy.
All the lockfast places had been broken open in quest of the chart.
The floor was thick with mud where ruffians had sat down to drink or consult after wading in the marshes round their camp.
The bulkheads, all painted in clear white and beaded round with gilt, bore a pattern of dirty hands.
Dozens of empty bottles clinked together in corners to the rolling of the ship.
In the midst of all this the lamp still cast a smoky glow, obscure and brown as umber.
I went into the cellar.
All the barrels were gone, and of the bottles a most surprising number had been drunk out and thrown away.
Certainly, since the mutiny began, not a man of them could ever have been sober.
Foraging about, i found a bottle with some brandy left, for hands.
And for myself i routed out some biscuit, some pickled fruits, a great bunch of raisins, and a piece of cheese.
He must have drunk a gill before he took the bottle from his mouth.
Much hurt i asked him.
He grunted, or rather, i might say, he barked.
He looked at me sourly enough but said nothing.
Some of the colour had come back into his cheeks, though he still looked very sick and still continued to slip out and settle down as the ship banged about.
Better none than these.
And again dodging the boom, i ran to the colour lines, handed down their cursed black flag, and chucked it overboard.
God save the king said i, waving my cap.
Why, yes, says i, with all my heart, mr.
And i went back to my meal with a good appetite.
I mean to get into north inlet and beach her quietly there.
To be sure you did, he cried.
Well, as it seemed to me, there was some sense in this.
We struck our bargain on the spot.
In three minutes i had the hispaniola sailing easily before the wind along the coast of treasure island, with good hopes of turning the northern point ere noon and beating down again as far as north inlet before high water, when we might beach her safely and wait till the subsiding tide permitted us to land.
With this, and with my aid, hands bound up the great bleeding stab he had received in the thigh, and after he had eaten a little and had a swallow or two more of the brandy, he began to pick up visibly, sat straighter up, spoke louder and clearer, and looked in every way another man.
The breeze served us admirably.
We skimmed before it like a bird, the coast of the island flashing by and the view changing every minute.
Soon we were past the high lands and bowling beside low, sandy country, sparsely dotted with dwarf pines, and soon we were beyond that again and had turned the corner of the rocky hill that ends the island on the north.
I was greatly elated with my new command, and pleased with the bright, sunshiny weather and these different prospects of the coast.
I had now plenty of water and good things to eat, and my conscience, which had smitten me hard for my desertion, was quieted by the great conquest i had made.
I should, i think, have had nothing left me to desire but for the eyes of the coxswain as they followed me derisively about the deck and the odd smile that appeared continually on his face.
But there was, besides that, a grain of derision, a shadow of treachery, in his expression as he craftily watched, and watched, and watched me at my work.
Israel hands the wind, serving us to a desire, now hauled into the west.
Only, as we had no power to anchor and dared not beach her till the tide had flowed a good deal farther, time hung on our hands.
The coxswain told me how to lay the ship to.
After a good many trials i succeeded, and we both sat in silence over another meal.
And there he lies, for me, said i.
I never seen sich dirty luck, not i.
Hands, but not the spirit.
You must know that already, i replied.
The whole story was a pretext.
But with what purpose i could in no way imagine.
His eyes never met mine.
All the time he kept smiling and putting his tongue out in the most guilty, embarrassed manner, so that a child could have told that he was bent on some deception.
I was prompt with my answer, however, for i saw where my advantage lay and that with a fellow so densely stupid i could easily conceal my suspicions to the end.
With that i scuttled down the companion with all the noise i could, slipped off my shoes, ran quietly along the sparred gallery, mounted the forecastle ladder, and popped my head out of the fore companion.
I knew he would not expect to see me there, yet i took every precaution possible, and certainly the worst of my suspicions proved too true.
In half a minute he had reached the port scuppers and picked, out of a coil of rope, a long knife, or rather a short dirk, discoloured to the hilt with blood.
He looked upon it for a moment, thrusting forth his under jaw, tried the point upon his hand, and then, hastily concealing it in the bosom of his jacket, trundled back again into his old place against the bulwark.
This was all that i required to know.
Israel could move about, he was now armed, and if he had been at so much trouble to get rid of me, it was plain that i was meant to be the victim.
Yet i felt sure that i could trust him in one point, since in that our interests jumped together, and that was in the disposition of the schooner.
We both desired to have her stranded safe enough, in a sheltered place, and so that, when the time came, she could be got off again with as little labour and danger as might be.
And until that was done i considered that my life would certainly be spared.
While i was thus turning the business over in my mind, i had not been idle with my body.
I had stolen back to the cabin, slipped once more into my shoes, and laid my hand at random on a bottle of wine, and now, with this for an excuse, i made my reappearance on the deck.
Hands lay as i had left him, all fallen together in a bundle and with his eyelids lowered as though he were too weak to bear the light.
You were asking me just now about the dead.
I spoke with a little heat, thinking of the bloody dirk he had hidden in his pocket and designed, in his ill thoughts, to end me with.
He, for his part, took a great draught of the wine and spoke with the most unusual solemnity.
Him as strikes first is my fancy.
All told, we had scarce two miles to run.
But the navigation was delicate, the entrance to this northern anchorage was not only narrow and shoal, but lay east and west, so that the schooner must be nicely handled to be got in.
I think i was a good, prompt subaltern, and i am very sure that hands was an excellent pilot, for we went about and about and dodged in, shaving the banks, with a certainty and a neatness that were a pleasure to behold.
Scarcely had we passed the heads before the land closed around us.
The shores of north inlet were as thickly wooded as those of the southern anchorage, but the space was longer and narrower and more like, what in truth it was, the estuary of a river.
Right before us, at the southern end, we saw the wreck of a ship in the last stages of dilapidation.
It had been a great vessel of three masts but had lain so long exposed to the injuries of the weather that it was hung about with great webs of dripping seaweed, and on the deck of it shore bushes had taken root and now flourished thick with flowers.
It was a sad sight, but it showed us that the anchorage was calm.
Now, said hands, look there.
And once beached, i inquired, how shall we get her off again why, so, he replied you take a line ashore there on the other side at low water, take a turn about one of them big pines.
Bring it back, take a turn around the capstan, and lie to for the tide.
And now, boy, you stand by.
The excitement of these last manoeuvres had somewhat interfered with the watch i had kept hitherto, sharply enough, upon the coxswain.
Even then i was still so much interested, waiting for the ship to touch, that i had quite forgot the peril that hung over my head and stood craning over the starboard bulwarks and watching the ripples spreading wide before the bows.
I might have fallen without a struggle for my life had not a sudden disquietude seized upon me and made me turn my head.
Perhaps i had heard a creak or seen his shadow moving with the tail of my eye.
At the same instant, he threw himself forward and i leapt sideways towards the bows.
As i did so, i let go of the tiller, which sprang sharp to leeward, and i think this saved my life, for it struck hands across the chest and stopped him, for the moment, dead.
Before he could recover, i was safe out of the corner where he had me trapped, with all the deck to dodge about.
The hammer fell, but there followed neither flash nor sound.
I cursed myself for my neglect.
Why had not i, long before, reprimed and reloaded my only weapons then i should not have been as now, a mere fleeing sheep before this butcher.
Wounded as he was, it was wonderful how fast he could move, his grizzled hair tumbling over his face, and his face itself as red as a red ensign with his haste and fury.
I had no time to try my other pistol, nor indeed much inclination, for i was sure it would be useless.
One thing i saw plainly i must not simply retreat before him, or he would speedily hold me boxed into the bows, as a moment since he had so nearly boxed me in the stern.
Seeing that i meant to dodge, he also paused.
And a moment or two passed in feints on his part and corresponding movements upon mine.
It was such a game as i had often played at home about the rocks of black hill cove, but never before, you may be sure, with such a wildly beating heart as now.
Indeed my courage had begun to rise so high that i allowed myself a few darting thoughts on what would be the end of the affair, and while i saw certainly that i could spin it out for long, i saw no hope of any ultimate escape.
Blow and all, i was the first afoot again, for hands had got involved with the dead body.
The sudden canting of the ship had made the deck no place for running on.
I had to find some new way of escape, and that upon the instant, for my foe was almost touching me.
I had been saved by being prompt.
The dirk had struck not half a foot below me as i pursued my upward flight.
And there stood israel hands with his mouth open and his face upturned to mine, a perfect statue of surprise and disappointment.
Now that i had a moment to myself, i lost no time in changing the priming of my pistol, and then, having one ready for service, and to make assurance doubly sure, i proceeded to draw the load of the other and recharge it afresh from the beginning.
My new employment struck hands all of a heap.
He began to see the dice going against him, and after an obvious hesitation, he also hauled himself heavily into the shrouds, and with the dirk in his teeth, began slowly and painfully to mount.
It cost him no end of time and groans to haul his wounded leg behind him, and i had quietly finished my arrangements before he was much more than a third of the way up.
Then, with a pistol in either hand, i addressed him.
At last, with a swallow or two, he spoke, his face still wearing the same expression of extreme perplexity.
In order to speak he had to take the dagger from his mouth, but in all else he remained unmoved.
I was drinking in his words and smiling away, as conceited as a cock upon a wall, when, all in a breath, back went his right hand over his shoulder.
Something sang like an arrow through the air.
I felt a blow and then a sharp pang, and there i was pinned by the shoulder to the mast.
They did not fall alone.
With a choked cry, the coxswain loosed his grasp upon the shrouds and plunged head first into the water.
Hands, who was not so far up, was in consequence nearer to the ship and fell between me and the bulwarks.
He rose once to the surface in a lather of foam and blood and then sank again for good.
A fish or two whipped past his body.
Sometimes, by the quivering of the water, he appeared to move a little, as if he were trying to rise.
But he was dead enough, for all that, being both shot and drowned, and was food for fish in the very place where he had designed my slaughter.
I was no sooner certain of this than i began to feel sick, faint, and terrified.
The hot blood was running over my back and chest.
The dirk, where it had pinned my shoulder to the mast, seemed to burn like a hot iron.
Yet it was not so much these real sufferings that distressed me, for these, it seemed to me, i could bear without a murmur.
I clung with both hands till my nails ached, and i shut my eyes as if to cover up the peril.
Gradually my mind came back again, my pulses quieted down to a more natural time, and i was once more in possession of myself.
It was my first thought to pluck forth the dirk, but either it stuck too hard or my nerve failed me, and i desisted with a violent shudder.
Oddly enough, that very shudder did the business.
The knife, in fact, had come the nearest in the world to missing me altogether.
It held me by a mere pinch of skin, and this the shudder tore away.
The blood ran down the faster, to be sure, but i was my own master again and only tacked to the mast by my coat and shirt.
These last i broke through with a sudden jerk, and then regained the deck by the starboard shrouds.
For nothing in the world would i have again ventured, shaken as i was, upon the overhanging port shrouds from which israel had so lately fallen.
I went below and did what i could for my wound.
It pained me a good deal and still bled freely, but it was neither deep nor dangerous, nor did it greatly gall me when i used my arm.
He went in with a sounding plunge.
The red cap came off and remained floating on the surface.
And as soon as the splash subsided, i could see him and israel lying side by side, both wavering with the tremulous movement of the water.
There he lay, with that bald head across the knees of the man who had killed him and the quick fishes steering to and fro over both.
I was now alone upon the ship.
The tide had just turned.
The sun was within so few degrees of setting that already the shadow of the pines upon the western shore began to reach right across the anchorage and fall in patterns on the deck.
The evening breeze had sprung up, and though it was well warded off by the hill with the two peaks upon the east, the cordage had begun to sing a little softly to itself and the idle sails to rattle to and fro.
I began to see a danger to the ship.
I thought this made it still more dangerous.
Yet the strain was so heavy that i half feared to meddle.
At last i got my knife and cut the halyards.
The peak dropped instantly, a great belly of loose canvas floated broad upon the water, and since, pull as i liked, i could not budge the downhall, that was the extent of what i could accomplish.
For the rest, the hispaniola must trust to luck, like myself.
I scrambled forward and looked over.
It seemed shallow enough, and holding the cut hawser in both hands for a last security, i let myself drop softly overboard.
The water scarcely reached my waist.
About the same time, the sun went fairly down and the breeze whistled low in the dusk among the tossing pines.
There lay the schooner, clear at last from buccaneers and ready for our own men to board and get to sea again.
I had nothing nearer my fancy than to get home to the stockade and boast of my achievements.
Possibly i might be blamed a bit for my truantry, but the recapture of the hispaniola was a clenching answer, and i hoped that even captain smollett would confess i had not lost my time.
So thinking, and in famous spirits, i began to set my face homeward for the block house and my companions.
This brought me near to where i had encountered ben gunn, the maroon.
And i walked more circumspectly, keeping an eye on every side.
The dusk had come nigh hand completely, and as i opened out the cleft between the two peaks, i became aware of a wavering glow against the sky, where, as i judged, the man of the island was cooking his supper before a roaring fire.
And yet i wondered, in my heart, that he should show himself so careless.
For if i could see this radiance, might it not reach the eyes of silver himself where he camped upon the shore among the marshes gradually the night fell blacker.
It was all i could do to guide myself even roughly towards my destination.
The stars were few and pale.
And in the low ground where i wandered i kept tripping among bushes and rolling into sandy pits.
Suddenly a kind of brightness fell about me.
With this to help me, i passed rapidly over what remained to me of my journey, and sometimes walking, sometimes running, impatiently drew near to the stockade.
Yet, as i began to thread the grove that lies before it, i was not so thoughtless but that i slacked my pace and went a trifle warily.
It would have been a poor end of my adventures to get shot down by my own party in mistake.
The moon was climbing higher and higher, its light began to fall here and there in masses through the more open districts of the wood, and right in front of me a glow of a different colour appeared among the trees.
For the life of me i could not think what it might be.
At last i came right down upon the borders of the clearing.
The rest, and the block house itself, still lay in a black shadow chequered with long silvery streaks of light.
On the other side of the house an immense fire had burned itself into clear embers and shed a steady, red reverberation, contrasted strongly with the mellow paleness of the moon.
There was not a soul stirring nor a sound beside the noises of the breeze.
I stopped, with much wonder in my heart, and perhaps a little terror also.
It had not been our way to build great fires.
I stole round by the eastern end, keeping close in shadow, and at a convenient place, where the darkness was thickest, crossed the palisade.
To make assurance surer, i got upon my hands and knees and crawled, without a sound, towards the corner of the house.
As i drew nearer, my heart was suddenly and greatly lightened.
It is not a pleasant noise in itself, and i have often complained of it at other times, but just then it was like music to hear my friends snoring together so loud and peaceful in their sleep.
In the meantime, there was no doubt of one thing.
They kept an infamous bad watch.
If it had been silver and his lads that were now creeping in on them, not a soul would have seen daybreak.
That was what it was, thought i, to have the captain wounded.
And again i blamed myself sharply for leaving them in that danger with so few to mount guard.
By this time i had got to the door and stood up.
All was dark within, so that i could distinguish nothing by the eye.
As for sounds, there was the steady drone of the snorers and a small occasional noise, a flickering or pecking that i could in no way account for.
With my arms before me i walked steadily in.
I should lie down in my own place i thought with a silent chuckle and enjoy their faces when they found me in the morning.
And he turned and groaned, but without awaking.
And then, all of a sudden, a shrill voice broke forth out of the darkness pieces of eight pieces of eight pieces of eight pieces of eight pieces of eight and so forth, without pause or change, like the clacking of a tiny mill.
It was she, keeping better watch than any human being, who thus announced my arrival with her wearisome refrain.
I had no time left me to recover.
At the sharp, clipping tone of the parrot, the sleepers awoke and sprang up.
And with a mighty oath, the voice of silver cried, who goes i turned to run, struck violently against one person, recoiled, and ran full into the arms of a second, who for his part closed upon and held me tight.
Bring a torch, dick, said silver when my capture was thus assured.
The pirates were in possession of the house and stores there was the cask of cognac, there were the pork and bread, as before, and what tenfold increased my horror, not a sign of any prisoner.
I could only judge that all had perished, and my heart smote me sorely that i had not been there to perish with them.
There were six of the buccaneers, all told.
Not another man was left alive.
Five of them were on their feet, flushed and swollen, suddenly called out of the first sleep of drunkenness.
The sixth had only risen upon his elbow.
I remembered the man who had been shot and had run back among the woods in the great attack, and doubted not that this was he.
He himself, i thought, looked somewhat paler and more stern than i was used to.
He still wore the fine broadcloth suit in which he had fulfilled his mission, but it was bitterly the worse for wear, daubed with clay and torn with the sharp briers of the wood.
And thereupon he sat down across the brandy cask and began to fill a pipe.
Give me a loan of the link, dick, said he.
Stick the glim in the wood heap.
I see you were smart when first i set my eyes on you, but this here gets away from me clean, it do.
To all this, as may be well supposed, i made no answer.
They had set me with my back against the wall, and i stood there, looking silver in the face, pluckily enough, i hope, to all outward appearance, but with black despair in my heart.
Silver took a whiff or two of his pipe with great composure and then ran on again.
And if fairer can be said by mortal seaman, shiver my sides am i to answer, then i asked with a very tremulous voice.
Through all this sneering talk, i was made to feel the threat of death that overhung me, and my cheeks burned and my heart beat painfully in my breast.
Time goes so pleasant in your company, you see.
And then, in his first gracious tones, he replied to me, yesterday morning, mr.
Leastways, none of us had looked out.
And you may lay to that, if i tells you that looked the fishiest.
He drew again quietly at his pipe.
And now i am to choose and now you are to choose, and you may lay to that, said silver.
Well, said i, i am not such a fool but i know pretty well what i have to look for.
I no more fear you than i fear a fly.
Kill me, if you please, or spare me.
It is for you to choose.
Kill another and do yourselves no good, or spare me and keep a witness to save you from the gallows.
I stopped, for, i tell you, i was out of breath, and to my wonder, not a man of them moved, but all sat staring at me like as many sheep.
And while they were still staring, i broke out again, and now, mr.
It was him that knowed black dog.
And he sprang up, drawing his knife as if he had been twenty.
Avast, there cried silver.
Morgan paused, but a hoarse murmur rose from the others.
I stood hazing long enough from one, added another.
Did any of you gentlemen want to have it out with me roared silver, bending far forward from his position on the keg, with his pipe still glowing in his right hand.
Him that wants shall get it.
Have i lived this many years, and a son of a rum puncheon cock his hat athwart my hawse at the latter end of it you know the way.
I never seen a better boy than that.
There was a long pause after this.
Silver leant back against the wall, his arms crossed, his pipe in the corner of his mouth, as calm as though he had been in church.
Yet his eye kept wandering furtively, and he kept the tail of it on his unruly followers.
They, on their part, drew gradually together towards the far end of the block house, and the low hiss of their whispering sounded in my ear continuously, like a stream.
One after another, they would look up, and the red light of the torch would fall for a second on their nervous faces.
But it was not towards me, it was towards silver that they turned their eyes.
You seem to have a lot to say, remarked silver, spitting far into the air.
Pipe up and let me hear it, or lay to.
Ax your pardon, sir, returned one of the men.
And by your own rules, i take it we can talk together.
I ax your pardon, sir, acknowledging you for to be captaing at this present.
But i claim my right, and steps outside for a council.
One after another the rest followed his example, each making a salute as he passed, each adding some apology.
According to rules, said one.
Forecastle council, said morgan.
And so with one remark or another all marched out and left silver and me alone with the torch.
But, you mark, i stand by you through thick and thin.
No, not till you spoke up.
I was about desperate to lose that much blunt, and be hanged into the bargain.
But i see you was the right sort.
Aye, by gum, i do he answered.
Understand me, jim, he said, returning.
I never much believed in neither of them.
Will you taste, messmate he asked.
Ah, well, he did, though, said he.
And he took another swallow of the brandy, shaking his great fair head like a man who looks forward to the worst.
Silver briefly agreed, and this emissary retired again, leaving us together in the dark.
I turned to the loophole nearest me and looked out.
The embers of the great fire had so far burned themselves out and now glowed so low and duskily that i understood why these conspirators desired a torch.
One held the light, another was on his knees in their midst, and i saw the blade of an open knife shine in his hand with varying colours in the moon and torchlight.
The rest were all somewhat stooping, as though watching the manoeuvres of this last.
I could just make out that he had a book as well as a knife in his hand, and was still wondering how anything so incongruous had come in their possession when the kneeling figure rose once more to his feet and the whole party began to move together towards the house.
Here they come, said i.
And i returned to my former position, for it seemed beneath my dignity that they should find me watching them.
The door opened, and the five men, standing huddled together just inside, pushed one of their number forward.
In any other circumstances it would have been comical to see his slow advance, hesitating as he set down each foot, but holding his closed right hand in front of him.
Step up, lad, cried silver.
I know the rules, i do.
Thus encouraged, the buccaneer stepped forth more briskly, and having passed something to silver, from hand to hand, slipped yet more smartly back again to his companions.
The black spot i thought so, he observed.
Where might you have got the paper why, hillo look here, now.
Dick, was it then dick can get to prayers, said silver.
But here the long man with the yellow eyes struck in.
Belay that talk, john silver, he said.
This crew has tipped you the black spot in full council, as in dooty bound.
I thought you said you knowed the rules, returned silver contemptuously.
Oh, we see through you, john silver.
Is that all asked silver quietly.
Enough, too, retorted george.
Silver paused, and i could see by the faces of george and his late comrades that these words had not been said in vain.
Go on, john, said morgan.
Speak up to the others.
Ah, the others returned john.
Why the doctor had given it to him was more than i could fancy.
But if it were inexplicable to me, the appearance of the chart was incredible to the surviving mutineers.
They leaped upon it like cats upon a mouse.
It went from hand to hand, one tearing it from another.
And by the oaths and the cries and the childish laughter with which they accompanied their examination, you would have thought, not only they were fingering the very gold, but were at sea with it, besides, in safety.
F., and a score below, with a clove hitch to it.
Mighty pretty, said george.
But how are we to get away with it, and us no ship.
Silver suddenly sprang up, and supporting himself with a hand against the wall now i give you warning, george, he cried.
But civil you can speak, and shall, george merry, you may lay to that.
But that was never my way.
A bible with a bit cut out returned silver derisively.
It was around about the size of a crown piece.
One side was blank, for it had been the last leaf.
The printed side had been blackened with wood ash, which already began to come off and soil my fingers.
On the blank side had been written with the same material the one word depposed.
He himself slept peacefully and snored aloud, yet my heart was sore for him, wicked as he was, to think on the dark perils that environed and the shameful gibbet that awaited him.
And the doctor it was.
Although i was glad to hear the sound, yet my gladness was not without admixture.
He must have risen in the dark, for the day had hardly come.
Bright and early, to be sure.
George, shake up your timbers, son, and help dr.
Livesey was by this time across the stockade and pretty near the cook, and i could hear the alteration in his voice as he said, not jim the very same jim as ever was, says silver.
The doctor stopped outright, although he did not speak, and it was some seconds before he seemed able to move on.
Well, well, he said at last, duty first and pleasure afterwards, as you might have said yourself, silver.
Let us overhaul these patients of yours.
A moment afterwards he had entered the block house and with one grim nod to me proceeded with his work among the sick.
He seemed under no apprehension, though he must have known that his life, among these treacherous demons, depended on a hair.
And he rattled on to his patients as if he were paying an ordinary professional visit in a quiet english family.
Your head must be as hard as iron.
Why, your liver, man, is upside down.
Did you take that medicine did he take that medicine, men aye, aye, sir, he took it, sure enough, returned morgan.
Well, step up here, dick, and let me see your tongue.
And now i should wish to have a talk with that boy, please.
And he nodded his head in my direction carelessly.
Silver struck the barrel with his open hand.
It seemed to me so obvious, in this case, that i could not imagine how he was to turn their anger.
No, by thunder he cried.
And then he bade them get the fire lit, and stalked out upon his crutch, with his hand on my shoulder, leaving them in a disarray, and silenced by his volubility rather than convinced.
Slow, lad, slow, he said.
They might round upon us in a twinkle of an eye if we was seen to hurry.
Very deliberately, then, did we advance across the sand to where the doctor awaited us on the other side of the stockade, and as soon as we were within easy speaking distance silver stopped.
Silver was a changed man once he was out there and had his back to his friends and the block house.
His cheeks seemed to have fallen in, his voice trembled.
Never was a soul more dead in earnest.
So, jim, said the doctor sadly, here you are.
As you have brewed, so shall you drink, my boy.
Heaven knows, i cannot find it in my heart to blame you, but this much i will say, be it kind or unkind when captain smollett was well, you dared not have gone off.
Doctor, i said, you might spare me.
I have blamed myself enough.
Doctor, said i, i passed my word.
I know, i know, he cried.
But stay here, i cannot let you.
I passed my word, and back i go.
But, doctor, you did not let me finish.
If they come to torture me, i might let slip a word of where the ship is, for i got the ship, part by luck and part by risking, and she lies in north inlet, on the southern beach, and just below high water.
At half tide she must be high and dry.
The ship exclaimed the doctor.
Rapidly i described to him my adventures, and he heard me out in silence.
There is a kind of fate in this, he observed when i had done.
And do you suppose by any chance that we are going to let you lose yours that would be a poor return, my boy.
You found out the plot.
Oh, by jupiter, and talking of ben gunn why, this is the mischief in person.
And you may lay to that.
No, said the doctor musingly.
My second is a piece of advice keep the boy close beside you, and when you need help, halloo.
Livesey shook hands with me through the stockade, nodded to silver, and set off at a brisk pace into the wood.
And i seen you say no, as plain as hearing.
This is the first glint of hope i had since the attack failed, and i owe it you.
Just then a man hailed us from the fire that breakfast was ready, and we were soon seated here and there about the sand over biscuit and fried junk.
They had lit a fire fit to roast an ox, and it was now grown so hot that they could only approach it from the windward, and even there not without precaution.
In the same wasteful spirit, they had cooked, i suppose, three times more than we could eat.
And one of them, with an empty laugh, threw what was left into the fire, which blazed and roared again over this unusual fuel.
I never in my life saw men so careless of the morrow.
Hand to mouth is the only word that can describe their way of doing.
And what with wasted food and sleeping sentries, though they were bold enough for a brush and be done with it, i could see their entire unfitness for anything like a prolonged campaign.
Even silver, eating away, with captain flint upon his shoulder, had not a word of blame for their recklessness.
And this the more surprised me, for i thought he had never shown himself so cunning as he did then.
I got what i wanted, i did.
Sure enough, they have the ship.
And then, mates, us that has the boats, i reckon, has the upper hand.
Thus he kept running on, with his mouth full of the hot bacon.
Thus he restored their hope and confidence, and, i more than suspect, repaired his own at the same time.
It was no wonder the men were in a good humour now.
For my part, i was horribly cast down.
Should the scheme he had now sketched prove feasible, silver, already doubly a traitor, would not hesitate to adopt it.
He had still a foot in either camp, and there was no doubt he would prefer wealth and freedom with the pirates to a bare escape from hanging, which was the best he had to hope on our side.
Nay, and even if things so fell out that he was forced to keep his faith with dr.
For all the world, i was led like a dancing bear.
Had he not struck a bargain with the doctor, he and his mutineers, deserted by the ship, must have been driven to subsist on clear water and the proceeds of their hunting.
Water would have been little to their taste.
A sailor is not usually a good shot.
And besides all that, when they were so short of eatables, it was not likely they would be very flush of powder.
Even these bore trace of the drunken folly of the pirates, one in a broken thwart, and both in their muddy and unbailed condition.
Both were to be carried along with us for the sake of safety.
And so, with our numbers divided between them, we set forth upon the bosom of the anchorage.
As we pulled over, there was some discussion on the chart.
The red cross was, of course, far too large to be a guide.
And the terms of the note on the back, as you will hear, admitted of some ambiguity.
Skeleton island e.s.e.
A tall tree was thus the principal mark.
Every here and there, one of a different species rose forty or fifty feet clear above its neighbours, and which of these was the particular tall tree of captain flint could only be decided on the spot, and by the readings of the compass.
Thence, bending to our left, we began to ascend the slope towards the plateau.
At the first outset, heavy, miry ground and a matted, marish vegetation greatly delayed our progress.
But by little and little the hill began to steepen and become stony under foot, and the wood to change its character and to grow in a more open order.
It was, indeed, a most pleasant portion of the island that we were now approaching.
And the first mingled their spice with the aroma of the others.
The air, besides, was fresh and stirring, and this, under the sheer sunbeams, was a wonderful refreshment to our senses.
The party spread itself abroad, in a fan shape, shouting and leaping to and fro.
From time to time, indeed, i had to lend him a hand, or he must have missed his footing and fallen backward down the hill.
We had thus proceeded for about half a mile and were approaching the brow of the plateau when the man upon the farthest left began to cry aloud, as if in terror.
Shout after shout came from him, and the others began to run in his direction.
Indeed, as we found when we also reached the spot, it was something very different.
At the foot of a pretty big pine and involved in a green creeper, which had even partly lifted some of the smaller bones, a human skeleton lay, with a few shreds of clothing, on the ground.
I believe a chill struck for a moment to every heart.
He was a seaman, said george merry, who, bolder than the rest, had gone up close and was examining the rags of clothing.
Aye, aye, said silver.
Indeed, on a second glance, it seemed impossible to fancy that the body was in a natural position.
Just take a bearing, will you, along the line of them bones.
The body pointed straight in the direction of the island, and the compass read duly e.s.e.
I thought so, cried the cook.
Right up there is our line for the pole star and the jolly dollars.
This is one of his jokes, and no mistake.
Him and these six was alone here.
Aye, that would be allardyce.
You mind allardyce, tom morgan aye, aye, returned morgan.
He owed me money, he did, and took my knife ashore with him.
And the birds, i guess, would leave it be.
Not a copper doit nor a baccy box.
Great guns messmates, but if flint was living, this would be a hot spot for you and me.
Six they were, and six are we.
And bones is what they are now.
I saw him dead with these here deadlights, said morgan.
Dear heart, but he died bad, did flint aye, that he did, observed another.
Now he raged, and now he hollered for the rum, and now he sang.
And i tell you true, i never rightly liked to hear it since.
Come, come, said silver.
Fetch ahead for the doubloons.
We started, certainly.
But in spite of the hot sun and the staring daylight, the pirates no longer ran separate and shouting through the wood, but kept side by side and spoke with bated breath.
The terror of the dead buccaneer had fallen on their spirits.
The plateau being somewhat tilted towards the west, this spot on which we had paused commanded a wide prospect on either hand.
There was no sound but that of the distant breakers, mounting from all round, and the chirp of countless insects in the brush.
Not a man, not a sail, upon the sea.
The very largeness of the view increased the sense of solitude.
Silver, as he sat, took certain bearings with his compass.
He were an ugly devil, cried a third pirate with a shudder.
That blue in the face too that was how the rum took him, added merry.
Blue well, i reckon he was blue.
Ever since they had found the skeleton and got upon this train of thought, they had spoken lower and lower, and they had almost got to whispering by now, so that the sound of their talk hardly interrupted the silence of the wood.
The colour went from their six faces like enchantment.
Some leaped to their feet, some clawed hold of others.
Morgan grovelled on the ground.
And the effect on my companions was the stranger.
Come, said silver, struggling with his ashen lips to get the word out.
His courage had come back as he spoke, and some of the colour to his face along with it.
And then rising a little higher, and with an oath that i leave out fetch aft the rum, darby the buccaneers remained rooted to the ground, their eyes starting from their heads.
Long after the voice had died away they still stared in silence, dreadfully, before them.
That fixes it gasped one.
They was his last words, moaned morgan, his last words above board.
Dick had his bible out and was praying volubly.
He had been well brought up, had dick, before he came to sea and fell among bad companions.
Still silver was unconquered.
I could hear his teeth rattle in his head, but he had not yet surrendered.
Nobody in this here island ever heard of darby, he muttered.
Belay there, john said merry.
And the rest were all too terrified to reply.
They would have run away severally had they dared.
But fear kept them together, and kept them close by john, as if his daring helped them.
He, on his part, had pretty well fought his weakness down.
Sperrit well, maybe, he said.
Now, no man ever seen a sperrit with a shadow.
But you can never tell what will affect the superstitious, and to my wonder, george merry was greatly relieved.
Aye, and so it were, cried morgan, springing on his knees.
But the older hands greeted this remark with scorn.
Why, nobody minds ben gunn, cried merry.
Dead or alive, nobody minds him.
It was extraordinary how their spirits had returned and how the natural colour had revived in their faces.
Soon they were chatting together, with intervals of listening.
He had said the truth dead or alive, nobody minded ben gunn.
Dick alone still held his bible, and looked around him as he went, with fearful glances.
But he found no sympathy, and silver even joked him on his precautions.
But dick was not to be comforted.
Indeed, it was soon plain to me that the lad was falling sick.
Hastened by heat, exhaustion, and the shock of his alarm, the fever, predicted by dr.
Livesey, was evidently growing swiftly higher.
It was fine open walking here, upon the summit.
Our way lay a little downhill, for, as i have said, the plateau tilted towards the west.
The pines, great and small, grew wide apart.
And even between the clumps of nutmeg and azalea, wide open spaces baked in the hot sunshine.
The first of the tall trees was reached, and by the bearings proved the wrong one.
It was conspicuous far to sea both on the east and west and might have been entered as a sailing mark upon the chart.
But it was not its size that now impressed my companions.
It was the knowledge that seven hundred thousand pounds in gold lay somewhere buried below its spreading shadow.
The thought of the money, as they drew nearer, swallowed up their previous terrors.
Their eyes burned in their heads.
Their feet grew speedier and lighter.
Their whole soul was found up in that fortune, that whole lifetime of extravagance and pleasure, that lay waiting there for each of them.
Silver hobbled, grunting, on his crutch.
His nostrils stood out and quivered.
He cursed like a madman when the flies settled on his hot and shiny countenance.
He plucked furiously at the line that held me to him and from time to time turned his eyes upon me with a deadly look.
Certainly he took no pains to hide his thoughts, and certainly i read them like print.
Now and again i stumbled, and it was then that silver plucked so roughly at the rope and launched at me his murderous glances.
Dick, who had dropped behind us and now brought up the rear, was babbling to himself both prayers and curses as his fever kept rising.
This grove that was now so peaceful must then have rung with cries, i thought.
And even with the thought i could believe i heard it ringing still.
We were now at the margin of the thicket.
Huzza, mates, all together shouted merry.
And the foremost broke into a run.
And suddenly, not ten yards further, we beheld them stop.
Silver doubled his pace, digging away with the foot of his crutch like one possessed.
And next moment he and i had come also to a dead halt.
Before us was a great excavation, not very recent, for the sides had fallen in and grass had sprouted on the bottom.
All was clear to probation.
The cache had been found and rifled.
The seven hundred thousand pounds were gone the fall of a chieftain there never was such an overturn in this world.
Each of these six men was as though he had been struck.
But with silver the blow passed almost instantly.
Well, he was brought up, in a single second, dead.
And he kept his head, found his temper, and changed his plan before the others had had time to realize the disappointment.
Jim, he whispered, take that, and stand by for trouble.
At the same time, he began quietly moving northward, and in a few steps had put the hollow between us two and the other five.
Then he looked at me and nodded, as much as to say, here is a narrow corner, as, indeed, i thought it was.
There was no time left for him to answer in.
The buccaneers, with oaths and cries, began to leap, one after another, into the pit and to dig with their fingers, throwing the boards aside as they did so.
Morgan found a piece of gold.
He held it up with a perfect spout of oaths.
Two guineas roared merry, shaking it at silver.
Mates, do you hear that i tell you now, that man there knew it all along.
They began to scramble out of the excavation, darting furious glances behind them.
One thing i observed, which looked well for us they all got out upon the opposite side from silver.
Well, there we stood, two on one side, five on the other, the pit between us, and nobody screwed up high enough to offer the first blow.
He watched them, very upright on his crutch, and looked as cool as ever i saw him.
He was brave, and no mistake.
At last merry seemed to think a speech might help matters.
Merry tumbled head foremost into the excavation.
The man with the bandage spun round like a teetotum and fell all his length upon his side, where he lay dead, but still twitching.
And the other three turned and ran for it with all their might.
Before you could wink, long john had fired two barrels of a pistol into the struggling merry, and as the man rolled up his eyes at him in the last agony, george, said he, i reckon i settled you.
Forward cried the doctor.
Double quick, my lads.
And we set off at a great pace, sometimes plunging through the bushes to the chest.
I tell you, but silver was anxious to keep up with us.
The work that man went through, leaping on his crutch till the muscles of his chest were fit to burst, was work no sound man ever equalled.
And so thinks the doctor.
As it was, he was already thirty yards behind us and on the verge of strangling when we reached the brow of the slope.
Doctor, he hailed, see there no hurry sure enough there was no hurry.
We were already between them and the boats.
And so we four sat down to breathe, while long john, mopping his face, came slowly up with us.
Thank ye kindly, doctor, says he.
You came in in about the nick, i guess, for me and hawkins.
And, he added, after a long pause, how do, mr.
Silver pretty well, i thank ye, says you.
It was a story that profoundly interested silver.
He had found the treasure.
As for you, jim, he said, it went against my heart, but i did what i thought best for those who had stood by their duty.
And if you were not one of these, whose fault was it that morning, finding that i was to be involved in the horrid disappointment he had prepared for the mutineers, he had run all the way to the cave, and leaving the squire to guard the captain, had taken gray and the maroon and started, making the diagonal across the island to be at hand beside the pine.
Soon, however, he saw that our party had the start of him.
And ben gunn, being fleet of foot, had been dispatched in front to do his best alone.
Ah, said silver, it were fortunate for me that i had hawkins here.
You would have let old john be cut to bits, and never given it a thought, doctor.
Not a thought, replied dr.
And by this time we had reached the gigs.
This was a run of eight or nine miles.
Silver, though he was almost killed already with fatigue, was set to an oar, like the rest of us, and we were soon skimming swiftly over a smooth sea.
It was the squire, and we waved a handkerchief and gave him three cheers, in which the voice of silver joined as heartily as any.
Three miles farther, just inside the mouth of north inlet, what should we meet but the hispaniola, cruising by herself the last flood had lifted her, and had there been much wind or a strong tide current, as in the southern anchorage, we should never have found her more, or found her stranded beyond help.
Another anchor was got ready and dropped in a fathom and a half of water.
A gentle slope ran up from the beach to the entrance of the cave.
At the top, the squire met us.
To me he was cordial and kind, saying nothing of my escapade either in the way of blame or praise.
I am told i am not to prosecute you.
Well, then, i will not.
Thank you kindly, sir, replied long john, again saluting.
I dare you to thank me cried the squire.
It is a gross dereliction of my duty.
And thereupon we all entered the cave.
It was a large, airy place, with a little spring and a pool of clear water, overhung with ferns.
Before a big fire lay captain smollett.
And in a far corner, only duskily flickered over by the blaze, i beheld great heaps of coin and quadrilaterals built of bars of gold.
How many it had cost in the amassing, what blood and sorrow, what good ships scuttled on the deep, what brave men walking the plank blindfold, what shot of cannon, what shame and lies and cruelty, perhaps no man alive could tell.
Come in, jim, said the captain.
Is that you, john silver what brings you here, man come back to my dooty, sir, returned silver.
Ah said the captain, and that was all he said.
What a supper i had of it that night, with all my friends around me.
Never, i am sure, were people gayer or happier.
And last the next morning we fell early to work, for the transportation of this great mass of gold near a mile by land to the beach, and thence three miles by boat to the hispaniola, was a considerable task for so small a number of workmen.
The three fellows still abroad upon the island did not greatly trouble us.
A single sentry on the shoulder of the hill was sufficient to ensure us against any sudden onslaught, and we thought, besides, they had had more than enough of fighting.
Therefore the work was pushed on briskly.
Gray and ben gunn came and went with the boat, while the rest during their absences piled treasure on the beach.
And for number, i am sure they were like autumn leaves, so that my back ached with stooping and my fingers with sorting them out.
Day after day this work went on.
By every evening a fortune had been stowed aboard, but there was another fortune waiting for the morrow.
And all this time we heard nothing of the three surviving mutineers.
It was only a snatch that reached our ears, followed by the former silence.
Heaven forgive them, said the doctor.
Silver, i should say, was allowed his entire liberty, and in spite of daily rebuffs, seemed to regard himself once more as quite a privileged and friendly dependent.
Indeed, it was remarkable how well he bore these slights and with what unwearying politeness he kept on trying to ingratiate himself with all.
Yet, i think, none treated him better than a dog, unless it was ben gunn, who was still terribly afraid of his old quartermaster, or myself, who had really something to thank him for.
Although for that matter, i suppose, i had reason to think even worse of him than anybody else, for i had seen him meditating a fresh treachery upon the plateau.
Accordingly, it was pretty gruffly that the doctor answered him.
Drunk or raving, said he.
Right you were, sir, replied silver.
And precious little odds which, to you and me.
I suppose you would hardly ask me to call you a humane man, returned the doctor with a sneer, and so my feelings may surprise you, master silver.
Ask your pardon, sir, you would be very wrong, quoth silver.
You would lose your precious life, and you may lay to that.
Well, that was about the last news we had of the three pirates.
Only once we heard a gunshot a great way off and supposed them to be hunting.
We left a good stock of powder and shot, the bulk of the salt goat, a few medicines, and some other necessaries, tools, clothing, a spare sail, a fathom or two of rope, and by the particular desire of the doctor, a handsome present of tobacco.
That was about our last doing on the island.
Before that, we had got the treasure stowed and had shipped enough water and the remainder of the goat meat in case of any distress.
And at last, one fine morning, we weighed anchor, which was about all that we could manage, and stood out of north inlet, the same colours flying that the captain had flown and fought under at the palisade.
The three fellows must have been watching us closer than we thought for, as we soon had proved.
For coming through the narrows, we had to lie very near the southern point, and there we saw all three of them kneeling together on a spit of sand, with their arms raised in supplication.
It went to all our hearts, i think, to leave them in that wretched state.
But we could not risk another mutiny.
And to take them home for the gibbet would have been a cruel sort of kindness.
The doctor hailed them and told them of the stores we had left, and where they were to find them.
After that, we kept under cover of the bulwarks, and when next i looked out they had disappeared from the spit, and the spit itself had almost melted out of sight in the growing distance.
That was, at least, the end of that.
And before noon, to my inexpressible joy, the highest rock of treasure island had sunk into the blue round of sea.
We laid her head for the nearest port in spanish america, for we could not risk the voyage home without fresh hands.
And as it was, what with baffling winds and a couple of fresh gales, we were all worn out before we reached it.
And the doctor and the squire, taking me along with them, went ashore to pass the early part of the night.
Ben gunn was on deck alone, and as soon as we came on board he began, with wonderful contortions, to make us a confession.
The maroon had connived at his escape in a shore boat some hours ago, and he now assured us he had only done so to preserve our lives, which would certainly have been forfeit if that man with the one leg had stayed aboard.
He had cut through a bulkhead unobserved and had removed one of the sacks of coin, worth perhaps three or four hundred guineas, to help him on his further wanderings.
I think we were all pleased to be so cheaply quit of him.
Well, to make a long story short, we got a few hands on board, made a good cruise home, and the hispaniola reached bristol just as mr.
Blandly was beginning to think of fitting out her consort.
Five men only of those who had sailed returned with her.
All of us had an ample share of the treasure and used it wisely or foolishly, according to our natures.
Captain smollett is now retired from the sea.
As for ben gunn, he got a thousand pounds, which he spent or lost in three weeks, or to be more exact, in nineteen days, for he was back begging on the twentieth.
Then he was given a lodge to keep, exactly as he had feared upon the island.
Of silver we have heard no more.
That formidable seafaring man with one leg has at last gone clean out of my life.
But i dare say he met his old negress, and perhaps still lives in comfort with her and captain flint.
It is to be hoped so, i suppose, for his chances of comfort in another world are very small.
The bar silver and the arms still lie, for all that i know, where flint buried them.
And certainly they shall lie there for me.
And the worst dreams that ever i have are when i hear the surf booming about its coasts or start upright in bed with the sharp voice of captain flint still ringing in my ears pieces of eight pieces of eight .
